Grading for CMSC 398z

Graded assignments

Students will be graded on:

- Learning log and check-in
- Classroom participation and engagement
- Submission of coding assignments for review

In each category, the lowest grade will be dropped.

Learning Log and check-in

Each week there will be two written assignments. One due by noon the
following Tuesday, and another and due at noon on Friday, 2 hours before
class. The one due on Tuesday will cover what you worked on the previous
class, the one due on Friday will be on the assigned reading for that
upcoming class. These assignments are designed to help you reflect on
your work from the previous class and prepare for the upcoming one. It
is a space to document your project work, challenges you encountered,
and your engagement with the course readings.

These consist of some short-answer and multiple-choice questions. They
are graded on thoughtful completion, not on correctness. Your honest
reflections are crucial, as they provide valuable feedback that will
help us understand student experiences in working with GenAI and improve
the course. Completing them promptly will allow us to take them into
account in preparing for the following week.

Each week's writing assignments will be graded on a scale of 1-6, with a
zero for an unexcused missing assignment. Any grade of 4 or less will be
promptly discussed with the student. Submissions 1-3 days late will be
given a 1 point penalty, 4-7 days late a 2 point penalty, more than 7
days late a 3 point penalty (penalties cannot reduce a grade to less
than 1).

A draft of the submission forms for the first week learning log will be
made available before class so students can understand the typical work
required to complete each weeks learning log.

Classroom participation and engagement

Graded each class based on instructor observation in the classroom
during pair and group work. Graded on a scale of 0-10, with the
expectation that most students will get a 10 each week. If a student
doesn't attend a class, they will get a score of 0 for class
participation for that week; it is not possible to submit something late
to be counted for classroom participation. Excused absences are not
graded and not included in the grade calculation.

- 0: No participation in class activities.
- 6: Significant time not on task
- 8 Not participating significantly with others or otherwise proving a
  challenge to their group
- 10 working well in pair and/or groups

Code submitted for review

Each assignment will be graded on a scale of 1-6, with a zero for an
unexcused missing assignment. We will ask students to submit the code
they worked on during class or after class. Grading will be based on an
assessment of whether students made a good faith attempt to work on the
assignment with an appropriate amount of time on task and provides
context for their learning log and check-in. A good faith attempt that
wasn't successful at achieving the desired functional outcomes can still
get a top grade.

Grading calculation

- 40% - Weekly learning log and check-in
- 40% - Class participation
- 20% - Code submitted for review

Grading curve:

No A+ grades will be given. Given the design of the course, we don’t
have a way to objectively identify exceptional work.

- 90: A
- 88: A-
- 86: B+
- 84: B
- 82: B-
- 79: C+
- 76: C
- 70: C-
- 60: D
