CMSC 398Z - Effective use of AI coding assistants and agents

Fall 2025, Fridays, 2-4pm, IRB 2207, organized by Bill Pugh and Derek
Willis.

PREREQUISITE: Minimum grade of C- in CMSC320 or CMSC330; and permission
of CMNS-Computer Science department.

Weekly Notes and downloads

All of the weekly notes and project downloads are now hosted on github.
Weekly notes include references and links for each class, as well as
links to readings and learning logs to be completed by the following
week.

- Class notes for Dec 12th
- Class notes for Dec 5th
- Class notes for Nov 21st
- Class notes for Nov 14th
- Class notes for Nov 7th
- Class notes for Oct 31st
- Class notes for Oct 24th
- Class notes for Oct 17th
  - Web site for Oct 17th class
- YouTube playlisy of course videos
- Zulip site for course
- Github link for all downloads
- Class notes for Oct 10th
- Class notes for Oct 3rd
  - Web site for Oct 3rd class
- Class notes for September 26th
- Class notes for September 19th
- Class notes for September 12th
- Class notes for September 5th

Course description

Covers how to effectively use AI coding tools to develop software. The
course will look at the tools and techniques used by engineers at
companies like Google and Microsoft to develop production-quality code,
as well as techniques to vibe code and quickly generate interactive
visualizations and proof-of-concepts. The course will cover using
chatbots, AI-powered IDEs such as VSCode with Copilot and command line
tools such as Claude code. Many of these tools can automatically invoke
build systems, run test cases, and fix errors. Most programming in the
course will be done in Python, which is the language best supported by
AI coding assistants. We will also cover Simon Willison's LLM tool,
which allows writing simple Python programs that query LLMs and interact
with databases, structured data extraction, and semantic search.

As the class and format are new, we are unsure of the speed it will take
us to work through the material, so no dates are given as to when we
will get to a particular topic. This entire field is changing very fast.
Best practices and available tools change month by month. At the start
of the semester, the agenda for the end of the semester is tentative and
may change significantly by November.

The first class will be the only class that is primarily lecture.
Expectations are that students will read/watch material and do exercises
and surveys for each class before the scheduled time. Most weeks, much
of the 2-hour window for class will be more like a discussion section or
hackathon, with students discussing projects and readings around each
table and doing pair coding.

There will be assigned readings for each week and a survey and learning
log for students to complete. It is expected that most or all of the
required work on programming tasks can be completed during class.

Topics

Details of course topics and planned readings provided here. High level
list of topics:

- Intro & Purpose
- Setting the stage. Quickly getting up to speed on
  - Python
  - VSCode
  - csv files, dataframes and databases
  - json
  - markdown
  - git basics
- Using GitHub Copilot in VSCode
- Building software that uses LLMs
  - Simon’s PyCon course on Building software on top of Large Language
    Models
  - Structured output & constrained generation
  - Security and prompt injection
- When AI generated code passes all test cases, what else matters?
  - Maintainability
  - Software architecture, API design
  - Efficiency and scalability
  - Security
  - Solving the right problem
- Other coding models (Claude Code, Gemini)
- Using AI tools with continuous integration, commit hooks, code reviews
- Vibe coding, and environments that allow you to use AI to create and
  deploy web applications
- Asynchronous coding agents and AI code reviews

Student expectations

A guiding principle for this course is that the best way to learn these
skills is to spend productive time using them, discussing your
experiences with others and hearing what experiences others had with
them. For that time to be productive, students need to have a way to get
unstuck when they encounter glitches. Rather than depend solely upon
office hours for that, we will expect that other students will generally
be able to help students get unstuck.

All instructor provided course material will be open to anyone. In order
to get the most out of the course, the following are the expectations
for class:

- Students should bring a laptop to class on which they can work on
  projects in class. Students will need to install software such as
  python and VS Code on their laptops.
- Students will sign up for services such as Copilot Pro, Open AI,
  Gemini, Claude and Cursor. Many of these are free for students, or
  have a free trial period. Students might find it useful to plan to pay
  for several months of service at $20/month over the course of the
  semester.
- Some of these services might allow the provider to use your data to
  improve their services. For example, Gemini Code Assist for
  individuals, which is free, allows Google to use data from your use of
  Code Assist to provide, improve, and develop Google products and
  services and machine learning technologies.
  - My advice is not to worry about that for your use of AI tools in
    this class, where you are not expected to be using them on your $1B
    start-up idea or anything sensitive. If you prefer, paid accounts
    generally allow you to opt out of any data sharing.

Creating a supportive environment

Students share a responsibility for the course’s learning environment.
Creating a cohesive online learning community requires learners to
support and assist each other. To craft an open and interactive online
learning environment, communication has to be conducted in a
professional and courteous manner at all times, guided by common sense,
collegiality and basic rules of etiquette.

This course involves more interaction with other students than you may
have had in any other CMSC course. Sharing and receiving feedback from
others is a skill you can continue to develop and improve over your
entire lifetime. Even at companies like Apple and Google it is a skill
that employees are provided mentorship on. If you find challenges in
general, or working with a particular person challenging, please reach
out to the instructors. Don't wait until it becomes such a significant
problem. If you find an individual unhelpful or challenging to work
with, we will take that information confidentially and see if we can
find ways to provide mentoring and feedback that doesn't require
escalation outside of the course. Of course, if a more significant
problem arises, we will handle that through standard campus reporting
mechanisms.

But also, if you feel that a particular student has been exceptionally
helpful in allowing you to master the material in this course, please
let us know. We will be looking to identify some heroes who have been
particularly helpful to others in the course and find a way to recognize
them.

Grading

It is expected that students will be able to complete their learning log
writing assignment and preparation for the next class in two hours of
work between classes. Participation in class activities is a significant
portion of the course grade, and cannot be accomplished without
attendance at each class. Details of grading

Disclosures

Companies and individuals working in this space are eager to attract
individuals, particularly students, to use their tools and resources,
and many provide some level of free access to students, or perhaps
everyone. We have made selections of tools and resources for this class,
but other than working well at this point in time to serve the goals of
this class, our use should not be considered as a recommendation of
which tools and resources are better. Nothing said in this course should
be considered investment advice.

Bill Pugh: I own stock in a number of tech companies including Google,
Apple and Microsoft. I've worked at Google and Apple, my brother works
on Copilot at Microsoft, and I have friends everywhere.

Derek Willis: Several former colleagues from my time in journalism now
work at tech companies, including Anthropic, and Simon Willison, whose
software and materials are referenced in this course, is a longtime
friend who provides me with access to a cloud service he runs for a side
project of mine. I’m also part of a team working on AI-assisted
journalism tools through a grant from the Scripps Howard Foundation.

Policies

- At the end of the semester visit the CourseEvalUM website to complete
  your course evaluations.
- UMD Web Accessibility
- Course-Related Policies and Resources for Undergraduate Students
- TLTC’s Accessibility and Accommodations page
  - Since there are no graded assignments or exams, there may not be a
    need for ADS accommodations. But if you have questions or concerns,
    please contact the instructors.
  - Please try to attend all classes, and show up promptly.
    Participation in class is a key element of how you will get value
    out of the course. We understand there may be times when you cannot
    attend, but more than one unexcused absence may impact your grade.
    Policy on excused absences
  - UMD’s Student Academic Support Services website
- Class conduct reporting, including Mandatory Reporting - See this page
  for discussions of how to report problems with class conduct. Issues
  with other students can be reported to instructors, that web page
  provides ways to report on issues with the instructors. If issues with
  other students are reported to the instructors, they may be required
  by mandatory reporting policies to forward concerns to appropriate
  campus organizations.
  - If you wish to speak with someone confidentially, please contact one
    of UMD’s confidential resources, such as CARE to Stop Violence
    (located on the Ground Floor of the Health Center) at 301-741-3442
    or the Counseling Center (located at the Shoemaker Building) at
    301-314-7651.
  - You may also seek assistance or supportive measures from UMD’s Title
    IX Coordinator, Angela Nastase, by calling 301-405-1142, or emailing
    titleIXcoordinator@umd.edu.
