Course homepage (Spring 2026)

Course structure

We are building a new version of 5150. So, the course maybe undergoing
some structural changes over the course of the semester. Please be
patient with us, and don't be alarmed if you see some changes in the
course schedule, project structure, or policies. We will communicate any
such changes well in advance.

[Laptop power button]

Welcome to the homepage for Cornell's Master's-level course on software
engineering! The majority of materials used in the course will be
available on this publicly-accessible website. We also have a Canvas
site for FERPA-protected content and services.

This course provides an introduction to the practical problems of
specifying, designing, building, testing, deploying, and maintaining
reliable software systems. The emphasis is on team-based development
integrating with moderately large, existing systems. Topics include
design patterns, issue tracking, version control, code review,
dependency management, continuous integration, and release management.
As a central part of the course, student teams will add large features
to real software systems, following an agile development process.

See Cornell’s class roster for meeting times and locations (note that
the description on the roster may be out-of-date; the synopsis above is
accurate for this semester's offering). Lectures will be delivered
exclusively in person except during university-mandated periods of
virtual instruction.

Prerequisites

CS 5150 is a 4-credit project-based course at the Master’s level. We
assume knowledge of object-oriented programming & data structures and
proficiency in an object-oriented language such as Java, C++, or Python.
But beyond those hard skills, we also assume sufficient maturity to
design, implement, and debug large program features (thousands of lines
of code) in the context of even larger systems and to learn new
programming languages and tools as necessary. In Cornell’s undergraduate
curriculum, CS 3110 and CS 4410/4414 should provide adequate
preparation. It will be helpful for some team members to have experience
with web frontend technologies (HTML/CSS/JavaScript).

Strong time-management and teamwork skills are also essential. Students
must be capable of collaborating effectively with their peers and
resolving conflicts to maintain healthy team dynamics. Plan to spend
considerable time outside of lecture hours working with your team
towards self-imposed milestones.

The language of instruction will be English, and clear English will be
expected for deliverables such as presentations and documentation.

Course Staff

[...]

Instructor

Saikat Dutta

[...]

TA

Joonhwan Yoo

[...]

TA

Junkai Huang

[...]

TA

Stephen Shen

[...]

TA

Kabir Anirudh Samsi

[...]

TA

Harsh Patel

[...]

TA

Kaitlyn Lu
