Internal project options

The following projects consist of adding features to the code review
tools mentioned on the projects page. Some projects may not apply to
certain tools (for example, if the tool already supports the proposed
feature). These are examples of possible features; you may propose other
features for other projects, subject to instructor approval.

Multi-anchored comments

Reviewers can add comments attached to a specific line of code. However,
many kinds of comments apply to multiple lines of code (for example,
they may suggest moving a line from one place to another, or they may
spot the same defect in multiple files). The client would like users to
be able to “link” a single comment to multiple locations in files in the
review. This will reduce redundancy for authors responding to feedback
without reducing thoroughness.

When adding a new inline comment, the user should have the option to
link to an existing comment in the review (possibly constrained to the
same patchset/revision). When browsing comments, they should list and
hyperlink to all file locations that link to them.

It would also be nice if comments could reference a range of lines in a
file rather than just a single line (this is already supported by Review
Board).

Comment on untouched files

One of the trickiest parts of reviewing code is identifying changes that
are necessary but absent from the submitted patch. Or sometimes it would
be convenient to reference a pattern or bit of documentation that
appears elsewhere in the codebase. Unfortunately, many code-review tools
limit comments to files and lines that were affected by the patch. The
client would like the ability to attach comments to other, currently
unaffected lines and files.

The first step is to support comments on files that are affected by the
changeset under review, but attached to lines far away from those
affected by the patch (this may already be supported by some code review
tools). Next, users should have the ability to introduce additional
files to the review (with zero changes) for the purpose of commenting on
them. Given the number of files present in many codebases, the user
interface for selecting the file deserves special attention.

The review interface should clearly distinguish files that have no
changes in a particular revision and are only referenced by comments.
And when viewing such files (or viewing comments in changed files far
away from the changes), the interface should show some context around
the comment(s), then “collapse” other code in the file, as it does
between changed regions.

This capability may interact with the “multi-anchored comments” project.

Reviewer read markers

The client would like reviewers to have the ability to mark individual
files (or even regions of files) as “read” at a particular revision of
the review. This helps them keep track of changes they have already
looked over.

If a subsequent revision does not change a file that was marked as
“read,” then that file should be shown as “tentatively read” in the new
revision (if the file was changed, it should be marked as “unread”). The
reviewer can change the status to “read” or “unread” (or back to
“tentatively read”, if applicable) at any time. The history of all
changes to a file’s read status (at a particular revision) should be
recorded, and there should be a way to view that history in the UI.

The review interface should show the user what proportion of the code
under review they have read (and tentatively read) at each revision. If
read markers are supported for regions within a file, then the file’s
overall read status should be shown as a percentage.

Read status should be stored separately for each reviewer. By default, a
reviewer should only see their own read markers, but there should be a
way to view other reviewers’ read status as well.

Inline edits

The client would like reviewers to be able to propose their own small
changes to code under review (such as fixing minor typos or rewording a
comment). The author would then have the ability to approve these
suggestions, resulting in a new revision with the changes applied. In a
merge-based review, this could create a new commit.

An additional desired feature is an interface for approving suggested
changes as a batch, creating only a single new revision (and allowing
the author to customize the commit message for a merge-based review).

The user interface needs to be very streamlined – it should be quicker
to make small changes using this feature than for the author to upload
changes made in their editor in response to a comment.

Merge-based reviews

Challenge project! This will likely be more difficult than the others.
Volunteers only.

Gerrit, in Google tradition, only supports reviewing single
“changesets.” But developers who have used GitHub are used to reviewing
“pull requests.” Pull requests allow authors to bundle several related
changes together for collective review while still separating
independent changes in different commits. They also allow reviewers to
comment on what will become the commit history (suggesting different
ways to split up the changes for ease of bisection, reverting, etc.).

Supporting pull requests requires major changes to the core data model
of Gerrit and would normally be well beyond the scope of a CS 5150
project. However, a Gerrit maintainer actually proposed a
proof-of-concept changeset supporting precisely this behavior; he even
included design documentation! Unfortunately, that was back in 2019, and
it was not merged. His work is described in this thread.

The client would like Gerrit to support merge-based reviews (a.k.a. pull
requests). While the client has strong opinions about how merge-based
reviews should function, this project will start out as a feasibility
exercise. The development team is asked to update the proof-of-concept
branch to work with the contemporary Gerrit codebase (this requires
resolving dozens of merge conflicts, performing code archaeology along
the way). The team will then analyze the test coverage of the changes
(improving it if necessary) and will demonstrate the capabilities to the
client. The client will then suggest tweaks based on the time remaining.

This work will be conducted in a separate branch to avoid interactions
with other projects. If successful, merging these branches may be a task
for a future semester.
