Project pitch

Overview

Propose an exciting new feature or enhancement to an existing software
system. You may choose any internal project from 5150 or an external
project. The feature must be non-trivial, should not have been
implemented before, and should be feasible to implement within the time
constraints of the course with a 4-5 person team. The pitch should not
propose building a new system from scratch. It must be adding a feature
to an existing open-source software system, ideally with a user
interface (UI/UX) component.

What to submit

Submit a 1-2 page PDF on Canvas that includes the following sections:

- Project title: A concise, descriptive title for your project.
- Team members: List the current members of your team if any.
- Abstract: A brief summary of the feature you are proposing.
- Current state: How is this problem currently solved (if at all)?
  Include screenshots or diagrams as necessary.
- Proposed enhancement: Describe the feature you are proposing. Include
  screenshots or diagrams as necessary. (You can use examples from other
  systems)
- Motivation: Why is this feature important? Who will benefit from it,
  and how?
- Technical challenges: What are the key technical challenges you expect
  to face in implementing this feature? What key skills will you need to
  learn or expect your team to have?
- Risks: What are the key risks to the success of this project? How do
  you plan to mitigate these risks?

Considerations

- Do not choose a project/feature that you cannot run on your system
  (e.g., mobile apps that require specific hardware). Also consider what
  resources your teammates may have.
- A link to all project proposals will be shared after the deadline.
  Please review them and rank them according to your preferences. You
  may choose to include/exclude your own project in your rankings.
- You may propose a project individually or as a team (up to 5 members).

Project selection and assignment

After submission, the course staff will review all project pitches and
communicate acceptance or rejection of the proposed project. You will
asked to review and rank all accepted projects. Based on your rankings
and team preferences, we will assign teams to projects.
