Project plan

Every software engineering project needs a written development plan.
There are many potential components of such a plan, and the plan will
evolve over the course of the project. For CS 5150, your initial plan
will likely run about 10 pages. It should include the following
mandatory sections:

- Name of project (should be descriptive, yet succinct; no “code
  names”).
- Client name and affiliation.
- List of team members (including NetIDs), identifying point of contact
  and any specialized team roles (if any).
- List of contributing team members. This should include all team
  members that contributed in developing the project plan (in class or
  out of class). Members who did not contribute to the plan will miss
  out on credit for this assignment.
- Description of task to be undertaken, scope of task, including
  preliminary requirements analysis and final deliverables. Clearly
  identify what is in and out of scope for the project. Consider
  different viewpoints of each feature you plan to implement (e.g.,
  user, system, client).
- Preliminary architecture. What existing systems will you interface
  with? Will your work be largely self-contained (e.g. a plugin
  component or service), or will it extensively modify existing code?
  Are there known technical requirements? (e.g., deployment
  infrastructure, existing frameworks). Point to code repository
  locations that might be modified as/if applicable.
- Development methodology and outline plan, showing schedule of
  principal activities, milestones, and deliverables. Please present as
  a table with dates, activities in each milestone, and deliverables.
  You may use a Gantt chart or other visual representation if you
  prefer, but please also include a textual table. Identify who is
  responsible for each deliverable. (You will provide more detailed
  schedules in later reports.)
- Coordination plan. How will you provide visibility to the client? How
  will the team communicate and conduct regular planning and reviews?
  How will requirements, risks, and issues be tracked? Responsibilities
  of individual team members, if any?
- Risk analysis. What could go wrong (e.g., technical challenges,
  resource limitations, usability concerns), and what is your plan to
  reduce, mitigate, monitor, and respond?
- (For external projects only) Discussion of business considerations,
  including assignment of copyright, licensing terms, and any
  non-disclosure agreements.
- Integration plan: How will your work integrate with the existing
  systems – how will it be integrated, tested, and deployed? Mention a
  target date in milestones for completing integration.
- Feasibility analysis: What are the constraints affecting the project?
  (e.g., time, budget). Are the requirements likely to be met within
  these constraints (i.e., does your schedule close), given the risks?
  Should the project go ahead?
  - You are allowed to recommend that a project not proceed if your
    analysis suggests that it is not likely to be feasible. But try to
    work with your client to reduce scope if your analysis trends that
    way.

The following sections are typically found in professional project plans
but are not expected in CS 5150 teams’ initial plans, as we will not
have covered the relevant topics in lecture yet):

- Development process / quality plan. Beyond the high-level development
  methodology, this would include requirements imposed on the source
  code, including style guides, static analysis, peer review, test
  coverage, and branch management. Some of these will be dictated by the
  course.
- Dependability, safety, and security plans. If you have non-functional
  requirements in these areas, you will write such a plan after we have
  covered the relevant material.

For reference, here are some initial plans from past CS 5150 projects
(published with their authors’ permission). They are very different in
style and address an older set of section requirements, but each is an
effective report.

- Reference statistics for Olin Library
- Mapping app for geo-referenced library materials
- Report on MedSimAI project, Spring 2025

In-Class Activity

We will devote the lecture time on Thursday, February 5, 2026 to working
on your project plans in class. Please come prepared with an outline of
your plan and any questions you have. You will have time to work with
your team and get feedback from the instructor and TAs. We expect all
team members to attend this session. For external projects, you can
either invite your client to attend or schedule a separate meeting with
your client to review your plan. However, you are expected to submit
your plan by the deadline below regardless of whether your client
attends the in-class activity.

Submission Instructions

Please submit your project plan as a PDF file to the course Canvas site
(see “Project Plan” assignment via Gradescope) by Thursday, February 5,
2026 end of class.
