External project requirements

This semester we are not allowing “greenfield” projects; your project
must involve enhancing a pre-existing system. Here are a few constraints
to keep in mind:

- The project must be worked on exclusively by a team of 4-5 students
  currently enrolled in CS 5150 (closely consulting with the client, of
  course).
  - Other parties may certainly contribute to the same codebase
    throughout the semester (this is realistic), but development that
    falls under the scope of the “project” must be managed and performed
    by a CS 5150 team.
- The client must commit to regular meetings with the development team
  (at least once per 3-week session; weekly is even better). They should
  understand their “client role” (they know what they want and can say
  whether or not they’re getting it).
  - You may not be your own client. Nor may your client have a conflict
    of interest that could compromise the fair assessment of anyone on
    the team (no significant others, no other CS 5150 students, etc.)
- The client must score the team for the client meetings, presentations,
  and the final deliverable using the resources shared by instructor.
  For each sprint, the client must score the teams within three days of
  the end of the sprint. Otherwise, the team will lose points. For
  external clients, the team is responsible following up with them about
  these steps. The course staff will not be able to do this for you. Of
  course, the course staff is happy to provide any required information
  and answer any questions.
- The task must involve adding new capabilities to an existing system of
  moderate complexity. How many authors have contributed to the existing
  code, and roughly how many lines of backend and test code already
  exist?
  - If the project involves building a new service to interact with
    others in a system, a better metric might be the number of services
    you’ll need to interface with and the size of their APIs.
  - As a rule of thumb, the existing code/context should be several
    times larger than what your project proposes to add.
- The existing system should have tests that can be run in an automated
  way (or else you will need to add such a testing capability and
  include that in your project scope).
- In most cases, projects should involve a user interface component and
  some persistent state. (Writing a function library would not make a
  good project for the purposes of this class.)
- The basic requirements of the project should be known (informally)
  ahead of time. Conducting research and inventing new algorithms are to
  be avoided—these tasks are very difficult to estimate and can block
  the whole project.
- The course staff must have permission to view the source code, and
  teams must contribute to the code via a version control system (Git is
  strongly preferred).
