Project report #3

As with reports #1 & #2, the content of your intermediate reports will
depend on your selected development methodology and on the milestones
you laid out in your project plan (including any updates you have made
to it). Remember that their purpose is to provide visibility to the
client and demonstrate whether or not your project is on track. So, the
outline of this report will be similar to the previous report #2, but
now you should be able to provide more information about the status of
your milestones, deliverables, and code development.

Additionally, your third report must document the state of testing in
your project. This documentation should include:

- Your test plan. After reading your test plan, your client should
  understand:
  - What styles and scopes of tests will cover your changes, and how
    thoroughly you aim for your changes to be covered
  - The extent to which tests may be automated, as well as any
    infrastructure requirements for “large” tests
  - Where implementing and conducting tests fall in the project’s
    schedule (hint: “at the very end” is not recommended)
- A summary of the current state of testing in the pre-existing system
  you are enhancing; for automatable tests, report a coverage metric
- Preliminary results from user testing your UI changes (you did include
  user testing in your test plan, right?). You should start recruiting
  users for testing as soon as you have a UI prototype ready, and you
  should be able to report on the results of at least one round of user
  testing by the time you submit this report. You should include a
  summary of your user testing process and results, including any
  feedback you received from users and how you plan to address that
  feedback in your development process. Students from other teams can
  participate as users. Recruit at least 3 users for testing.

Code Review (New): For sprint 2 and 3, you should conduct a code review
session with your client where you walk through the code you have
written so far (ideally using an active pull request). You should
include a summary of this code review in your report, including any
feedback you received from your client and how you plan to address that
feedback in your development process.

Grading: This report will be graded based on the completeness and
quality of the above elements, as well as the overall clarity and
professionalism of the report. The report should be well-organized,
clearly written, and free of spelling and grammatical errors. We will
also be looking for evidence of progress towards your milestones and
deliverables, as well as a clear plan for how you will continue to make
progress in the next phase of the project. You may lose points if your
report does not include all of the above elements, if it is poorly
organized or written, or if you did not achieve your milestones or
deliverables without a clear explanation of why and how you plan to get
back on track, or if your code repository contributions do not follow
proper software engineering practices (e.g., if they do not include
clear commit messages, if they do not demonstrate that all team members
are contributing, or if they do not follow the branching strategy
outlined in your project plan). You may also lose points if you did not
address any client feedback received since the last report, or if you
did not update your risk analysis to reflect any new risks that have
been identified since the last report.
