Projects

Software engineering concerns the production of software by teams of
developers for use by others. Therefore, a major component of CS 5150 is
a semester-long team project whose requirements must be extracted from
clients. The main constraints are:

- Teams should consist of 4–5 students
- Students may form their own teams (or partial teams) around a project,
  or they may complete a survey to be matched with others. The course
  staff will make the final decisions regarding team compositions.
- Teams may work on a pre-approved internal project (described below),
  or they may propose a different feature on an internal project or a
  different project with an external client. In each case, please get
  approval from the instructor/course staff before proceeding. We will
  prioritize projects that are feasible within the time constraints of
  the course (but are not too simple) and that provide sufficient
  learning opportunities for all team members. We will also try to
  ensure that each team works on a unique project.
- See Ed Discussion for students recruiting teams.

Project Deliverables

Teams have some freedom to define their own milestones and intermediate
deliverables, but several reports and presentations are required at
predefined intervals (typically once per three-week development
session). Reflections and peer evaluations will also be collected at
these times.

1.  Project pitch and Team Formation (due Jan 29)
2.  Project plan (due Feb. 5)
3.  Report #1 (due Feb 28)
4.  Report #2 (due March 28)
5.  Report #3 (due April 27)
6.  Final delivery (due May 15)

Presentations must be given to clients and instructors during sessions 3
& 5.

1.  Midpoint presentation (March 12, March 17, in-class)
2.  Final presentation (April 30)

The contents of the intermediate reports will largely depend on a team’s
selected methodology, but some common elements will be required of all
teams.

Requirements

GitHub

We require you to use a public Github repository for version control,
issue tracking, code review, and continuous integration. This means you
will use Git for all source code management.

You may need to learn advanced Git techniques and workflows to
effectively collaborate on your project. Git is a powerful tool that
supports branching, merging, rebasing, and more, which are essential for
managing complex projects with multiple contributors, and is heavily
used in the software industry. So, learning it is a valuable skill. Some
Git resources:

- Git Book
- Git Documentation
- Version Control Advice

When working on an internal project, please create a "fork" of the
repository and continue making changes there. Please add the course
staff as a member to your GitHub repo.

Client Meetings

Teams are expected to meet with their client on a regular basis, ideally
once a week or at minimum once per sprint. The meeting frequency will be
mutually agreed upon by the teams and their client.

Teams must be well prepared for each meeting with clear agendas and
objectives to ensure productive discussions and progress tracking.

After each meeting, the client will submit a gradesheet scoring their
interaction with the team members. Team members will be scored on their
professionalism, participation, and preparedness.

Role of Course Staff

The course staff will serve as both a client and manager for your
projects. When meeting with the TAs, you can ask them to serve in any of
these roles. As a manager, the TA will provide useful suggestions and
guidance to help your team succeed.

You are expected to get familiar with all the tools and languages used
in your project -- just like in the real world. While the course staff
can provide guidance and may be familiar with some of these tools, the
primary responsibility for learning and mastering these tools lies with
you and your team.

Some students report that the opportunity to learn new tools and
technologies is one of the most valuable aspects of this course!

Code Quality/Software Engineering Practices

Teams are expected to follow best practices in code quality and software
engineering throughout the project lifecycle. This includes writing
clean, maintainable code, conducting thorough code reviews, adhering to
agreed-upon coding standards, maintaining modularity and abstraction.

Each team may be required to incorporate automated style checking and CI
tools into their development workflow to ensure code quality and
consistency.

Teams must follow a rigorous code review process to ensure high-quality
contributions and maintain project standards.

We will strongly evaluate these practices in the final grading.

Project Timeline

- Week 1: Project Pitch and Selection (Jan 22)
- Week 2: Finalize Project Teams (Jan 29)
- Week 3: Submit Project Plan (Feb 5)
- Weeks 4-6: First Sprint
- Week 6: Submit First Sprint Report #1 (Feb 26)
- Weeks 7-10: Sprint 2
- Weeks 7-9: Midpoint Presentation
- Week 10: Submit Second Sprint Report #2 (Mar 26)
- Weeks 11-14: Sprint 3
- Week 14: Submit Third Sprint Report #3 (Apr 23)
- Weeks 15-16: Sprint 4
- Weeks 15-16: Final Presentation
- Week 16: Submit Final Report and Deliverables (May 15 (Tentative))

Sprint Dates

- Sprint 1: Feb 5 - Feb 26 (Understanding codebase architecture)
- Sprint 2: Feb 27 - Mar 26 (Work towards first simplest
  prototype/Midpoint PPT)
- Sprint 3: Mar 27 - Apr 23 (Rapid feature development/testing)
- Sprint 4: Apr 24 - May 15 (Acceptance testing/User Testing/Final PPT)

External projects

External projects must meet certain requirements to be eligible for CS
5150.

Business considerations

External projects must take into account potential concerns regarding
copyright, patents, trade secrets, data stewardship, and conflicts of
interest. Included with your project plan should be a signed agreement
between the client and your team addressing any relevant considerations.
The client must be allowed to use and extend your software after it is
delivered, so at a minimum you must decide how this permission will be
granted (typically by either transferring copyright to the client or by
providing the client with an unrestricted license).

See copyright for external projects for examples of external client
agreements from previous semesters.

Internal projects

Teams in CS 5150 may add features to one of the following open-source
projects. These host projects are all collaboration tools, allowing
everyone to be familiar with the problem domain (this also allows you to
incorporate dogfooding into your development process).

Gerrit

A code review tool maintained by Google to facilitate their
contributions to open-source projects in Git repositories (such as
Android).

Website
    www.gerritcodereview.com

Backend
    Java 11

Frontend
    Polymer, TypeScript

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Official setup instructions

Airflow

An open-source tool for orchestrating complex computational workflows
and data processing pipelines.

Website
    https://airflow.apache.org/

Backend
    Python

Frontend
    Typescript, Javascript, CSS, HTML

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Official setup instructions

Mattermost

An open-source, self-hosted collaboration platform that offers chat,
workflow automation, voice calling, screen sharing, and AI integration.

Website
    https://mattermost.com/

Backend
    Go

Frontend
    Typescript, Javascript, HTML, CSS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Official setup instructions

Zulip

An open-source team chat tool

Website
    zulip.com

Backend
    Python,

Frontend
    Typescript, Javascript, CSS, HTML

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Official setup instructions

See internal project options for a list of capabilities that course
staff would like to see added to the above applications.

Stakeholders

Ideally, the clients requesting these features would be distinct from
the course staff, but that arrangement is not feasible for this offering
of the course. Therefore, in order to keep discussions of “class
mechanics” (grades, lecture material) out of your client interactions,
please reserve such topics for office hours. For scheduled meetings,
course staff will always assume a client role.
