Final delivery

In addition to your final presentation and demonstration of the
completed system, you must prepare a handover package to deliver to your
client. The package consists of a brief report reflecting on the final
development session, the source code for the software itself, and an
index to other deliverables (which may be stored in your code repository
or its associated GitHub Wiki).

Report

Much like previous reports, you should discuss your team’s progress
during the final session: how did work proceed compared with your most
recent project plan, and which risks (if any) were manifested and how
were they managed. Unlike previous reports, however, you cannot revise
your plan and push tasks to the future. Therefore, you must include a
detailed summary of which originally-requested features were delivered,
which were revised (with client approval) over the course of the
project, and which could not be delivered. If there is unfinished work
in progress, clearly describe its location, status, and remaining tasks.
You should also note any takeaways from your final presentation and
acceptance testing/deployment.

User Testing and Feedback

You must conduct a user testing session with 3-5 participants (other
than your team members and client) and include a summary of the results
in your report. You should design 2-4 tasks that cover the use cases you
modeled in your requirements analysis, and ask participants to complete
these tasks using your system. Time bound each task. You should observe
and record their interactions with the system, and ask them to provide
feedback on their experience. Consider creating a simple survey to
gather more structured feedback. You should summarize the results of
this testing in your report, including any issues that were identified
and any suggestions for improvement.

Handover package

A software system is more than just the code itself. Over the semester
you produced a large body of work related to your project, and now is
the time to edit and organize it to ensure it provides value to the
client, users, and future maintainers. For internal projects, the
contents of your handover package should either be committed to your
code repository or uploaded to its associated GitHub Wiki; for external
projects (especially those not using Cornell’s GitHub), check with your
client about how they’d like the package delivered.

Every project is different, so the exact contents and format of the
package are up to you. What is important is that the contents are
carefully edited and suitable for handing off to your client. You may
choose to collect most of these deliverables into a single document, or
you may link to dedicated files from an index document (such as a wiki
page). Do not link to documents on Google Drive or other cloud services
(unless they are owned by the client).

For internal projects, your delivered code must be merged to the trunk
branch; code on other branches will not be considered “delivered.” (Do
not push this off until the last minute—merge conflicts with other teams
are possible and must be resolved.) All GitHub issues related to
delivered features should be closed.

Aside from your code, your handover package should include at least the
following:

- A comprehensive user’s manual documenting how to interact with your
  new capabilities in order to accomplish various tasks (i.e. each of
  the use cases you modeled)
  - Be sure to provide documentation for all user roles (e.g. reviewers,
    authors, administrators, etc.)
- A comprehensive maintainer’s manual documenting system design, test
  facilities, and deployment procedure. (When discussing test
  facilities, be specific about how future developers can run or
  reproduce your tests in order to avoid regressions.) It would probably
  be helpful to include some documentation elements from your previous
  reports (revised for accuracy), such as:
  - Requirements analysis and specification
  - Architectural diagrams
  - Class diagrams
  - Final user interface designs
  - Style guide and developer workflow
  - Test plan and results
- A signed license agreement. Internal project teams should either agree
  that your joint work can be published under the host application’s
  open-source license or that your contributions should remain private
  to this course. External project teams should have reached an
  agreement with your client during the project planning phase (see
  copyright for external projects).

Demo Video

You must also prepare a short video (5-10 minutes) demonstrating the
features you have delivered. This video should be recorded in a staging
environment (e.g., a laptop) and should be interactive (not
pre-recorded). This video should be a more polished version of the
demonstration you gave during your final presentation, and it should be
suitable for sharing with your client and other stakeholders. Be sure to
include a clear introduction and conclusion, and to walk through
scenarios related to your feature’s use cases. It should be hosted on
platform with persistent access (e.g., Youtube), and the link should be
included in your handover package. We will include this video on our
course website.
