Syllabus

Course description

Introduction to the practical problems of specifying, designing,
building, testing, deploying, and maintaining reliable software systems.
Emphasis on team-based development integrating with moderately large,
existing systems. Topics include design patterns, issue tracking,
version control, code review, dependency management, continuous
integration, and release management. As a central part of the course,
student teams will add large features to real software systems,
following an agile development process.

Prerequisites

Minimum: CS 2110 or equivalent experience programming in Java or C++. CS
3110 or CS 4410/4414 strongly recommended for Cornell undergraduates.
Sufficient maturity to design, code, and debug large programs and to
learn new programming languages and tools.

Instructor

Saikat Dutta
Lecturer, Computer Science
Gates Hall 438
saikatd@cornell.edu
Office Hours: Mondays 1 PM - 2 PM, Gates 438 or by Appointment

Teaching Assistants

Joonhwan Yoo
jy2249@cornell.edu
Stephen Shen
zs435@cornell.edu
Junkai Huang
jh2973@cornell.edu
Kabir Anirudh Samsi
kas499@cornell.edu
Harsh Patel
hhp26@cornell.edu
Kaityln Lu
kl995@cornell.edu

TA Office Hours: Wednesdays 1-2 PM; Room: 441 Statler Hall

Meeting times

Lectures are held Tuesdays and Thursdays from 1:25pm to 2:40pm,
beginning on January 20 and ending on May 5. Attendance and
participation are expected. In-person lectures take place in Gates G01
(see Class Roster).

Project Teams will need to arrange meeting times outside of class to
conduct reviews with all members in attendance.

Personal technology

Engagement during lectures will be facilitated with Poll Everywhere
polls. Responding to polls requires an Internet-connected mobile device
(laptop, tablet, or smartphone). However, multitasking on such devices
during lecture is known to impede learning and lower grades for both you
and your neighbors, so we ask that you only use these devices for poll
responses, notetaking, and following along with demos. Students who are
nevertheless prone to multitask should sit in the back of the classroom
(and classmates should not hesitate to ask distracting students to
relocate there).

Materials & services

At a minimum, students will require the following in order to
participate in the course:

- Access to a computer programming environment (editor, compiler, Git)
- Ability to browse contemporary websites and read PDF documents

Students are not required to purchase a textbook; all required readings
will be available for free in digital form. Several readings will be
from the book Software Engineering at Google, which is also available in
paperback.

The course will utilize the following online services, most of which you
can access with your Cornell account once you are logged into Canvas:

- Course website (lecture materials and assignments; accessible to
  public)
- Canvas (restricted materials and links, quizzes and surveys, virtual
  lecture recordings)
- Zoom (virtual lectures when required by university, virtual office
  hours)
- Ed Discussion (class discussion board)
- Poll Everywhere (lecture polls)
- Gradescope (exam feedback)
- Cornell GitHub (version control, issue tracking, code reviews)

Learning objectives

By the end of this course, students will be able to:

- Apply software engineering techniques and tools to real-world projects
- Work effectively in teams to develop features in a large software
  codebase
- Describe technical concepts related to software engineering clearly
  and effectively

Assessment/Grading

Performance on the following elements will factor into a student’s
course grade:

- In-class exams
- Team project deliverables
- Assignments
- Attendance and Participation: Polls (only graded for completeness),
  In-class activities, Quizzes, etc.

These components are weighted at the discretion of the instructor, but
performance on the group project (that is, consistent application of the
techniques taught in class towards a viable, best-effort deliverable) is
the most significant factor.

Exams: This class will not have a centrally-scheduled prelim or final;
all exams will be given in class. There will be two in-class exams,
weighted equally.

Project Scoring Rubrics: These are the high-level components that will
be evaluated to determine your project grade. These components are
weighted at the discretion of the instructor (but assume equal weightage
unless otherwise specified).

- Client Meetings: At least one per sprint
- Project Reports: Project plan, sprint reports, and final report
- Presentations (2): Midpoint and Final
- Peer Evaluations: Your contributions evaluated by teammates
- Code and Product Quality

Grade Breakdown

- Project: 60%
- In-class exams (2): 20%
- Attendance/In-class activities: 10%
- Assignments: 10%

Grade Boundaries: The actual grade boundaries have not been decided yet
because there are many moving components in the course and they change
every year. However, to manage your expectations, we can guarantee that:
Scores above 90% will receive at least A-, Scores above 80% will receive
at least B-, and scores above 65% will receive at least C-.

Communication

The primary mode of communication for this course will be via Canvas.
The course website contains the most up-to-date information about the
schedule. We will use Ed for discussions. We will use Gradescope and
CMSX for assignments and grading. For any special circumstances, please
contact the course staff via email.

AI usage

You may use AI tools to assist with coding, but you must clearly
disclose any AI-generated content in your report and ensure that all
submitted work meets the course's academic integrity standards. You may
not use AI tools for any in-class exams or in-class activities unless
explicitly permitted by the instructor. If you have any questions or
concerns, please contact the course staff.

Late Assignment

For each assignment or report, students can submit after the due date.
Each late day will be penalized by a maximum of 10% per day (at the
discretion of course staff). Longer grace periods without penalty for
assignments/reports are subject to approval by the instructor and will
only be allowed due to any extenuating/extreme, unavoidable
circumstances. Late submission for final project report is not allowed.

Attendance

Engaging in classroom activities both improves your learning and creates
a more vibrant learning environment for your peers, so we want to reward
you for it. Class participation will largely be assessed via Poll
Everywhere responses. Students do not need perfect attendance or
perfectly correct responses to maximize the participation component of
their grade! (Such a policy creates perverse incentives, such as
rewarding coming to class when ill, which we do not want.) Please do not
contact the staff asking to be excused for an absence – we trust you to
manage your health and commitments wisely and will not penalize you for
missing class occasionally. If habitual absence causes you to miss more
than a third of lectures, that is when you should seek advice from the
staff.

Unless the university mandates a move to virtual instruction (such as
for the first two weeks of the semester), lectures are offered
exclusively in person and are not recorded. But be mindful of public
health – if you do not feel well, please stay home. Posted materials,
our discussion board, and your teammates are all available to help you
get caught up after an absence.

Community of learning and professionalism

We aim to create an inclusive learning environment where diversity and
individual differences are respected and appreciated, and we expect
students in this class to demonstrate diligence in understanding how
others’ perspectives may be different from their own. Behaviors that
contribute positively to our community of learning include:

- Recognize that everyone is starting from different bases of knowledge.
  Be respectful and constructive when pointing out mistakes.
- Listen to one another and, especially during group work, actively
  encourage everyone to contribute.
- Help build a lively and active online learning environment. Ask and
  answer questions on our discussion board, always remembering to be
  respectful and constructive.

Accommodations

We provide accommodations for disabilities. Students with disabilities
can contact Student Disability Services at 607-254-4545 or the
instructor for a confidential discussion of their individual needs. If
you experience personal or academic stress or need to talk to someone
who can help, contact the instructor or:

- Engineering Academic Advising at 607-255-7414
- Learning Strategies Center at 607-255-6310
- Let's Talk Drop-in Counseling at Gannett - 607-255-5155
- Empathy Assistance and Referral Service at 607-255-3277

Academic integrity

Integrity is a cornerstone of both our learning community and
professional life. Much of the work in this course is collaborative, but
all documents and code submitted must be written solely by the student
or team members submitting it, and ideas or feedback from others must be
properly attributed. Always abide by Cornell’s Code of Academic
Integrity and any course-specific rules regarding its interpretation.
