Final Project

Like to see some of last year’s final projects?

- Ideas
- Combining Courses
- Specifications
  - Proposal
    - What to Do
  - Status Report
    - What to Do
  - Implementation
    - How to Submit
      - Step 1 of 2
      - Step 2 of 2

The climax of this course is its final project. The final project is
your opportunity to take your newfound savvy with programming out for a
spin and develop your very own piece of software. So long as your
project draws upon the course’s lessons, the nature of your project is
entirely up to you, albeit subject to the staff’s approval. You may
implement your project in any language(s) as long as the staff approves.
You are welcome to utilize any infrastructure, provided the staff
ultimately has access to any hardware and software that your project
requires. All that we ask is that you build something of interest to
you, that you solve an actual problem, that you impact campus, or that
you change the world. Strive to create something that outlives this
course.

Inasmuch as software development is rarely a one-person effort, you are
allowed an opportunity to collaborate with one or two classmates for
this final project. Needless to say, it is expected that every student
in any such group contribute equally to the design and implementation of
that group’s project. Moreover, it is expected that the scope of a two-
or three-person group’s project be, respectively, twice or thrice that
of a typical one-person project. A one-person project, mind you, should
entail more time and effort than is required by each of the course’s
problem sets. Although no more than three students may design and
implement a given project, you are welcome to solicit advice from
others, so long as you respect the course’s policy on academic honesty.

Extensions on the final project will not be granted.

Ideas

Here are just some of the possibilities. Discuss any and all with the
the staff! And if you’d like to solicit collaborators for an idea you
have, do post in Ed!

- a web-based application using JavaScript, Python, and SQL
- an iOS app using Swift
- an Android app using Java
- a Chrome extension using JavaScript
- a command-line program using C
- a hardware-based application for which you program some device
- a web-based application using Node.js
- a game using Lua with LÖVE
- …

Combining Courses

If taking some other course this semester that has a final project, you
are welcome and encouraged to combine this course’s project and that
course’s project into one, toward an end of applying lessons learned in
CS50 to some other field, so long as the joint project satisfies this
course’s and that course’s expectations. Before pursuing a joint
project, though, you must disclose to both courses and receive approval
from both courses.

Apple Vision Pro

Interested in using the Apple Vision Pro for your final project? We’d
love to hear your ideas!

Due to limited availability, students interested in developing for
Vision Pro must first submit a short proposal.

Want some inspiration? Check out the following:

- Immersive and Interactive Stories for Apple Vision Pro
- Creative Storytelling for Apple Vision Pro Immersive Video & Audio

These presentations explore:

- Creative ideas for Apple Immersive Video
- Designing for spatial interaction
- Using SharePlay to help people connect
- Best practices for immersive audio and video
- Insights from developers and creators like TARGO, BlackMagic,
  ColorFront, SpatialGen, and Anton Tamy (director of The Weeknd’s Open
  Hearts immersive music video)

If you’d like to be considered for Vision Pro access, please indicate
your interest via this form.

Specifications

Extensions on the final project are not granted, except in cases of
emergency.

Proposal

Gradescope will not permit you to upload your proposal until
2025-11-10T16:15:00-05:00.

due by 2025-11-17T23:59:00-05:00

The proposal is your opportunity to receive approval and counsel from
the staff before you proceed to design.

The staff will either approve your proposal or require modifications on
your part for subsequent approval. Your proposal, even if approved, is
not binding; you may alter your plan at any point, provided you obtain
the staff’s approval for any modifications. Projects submitted without
approval may not receive credit.

What to Do

1.  Go to CS50’s Gradescope page.
2.  Select Final Project: Proposal.
3.  Answer all questions therein.

If you are collaborating with other students, it is incumbent on one
member of the group to submit on behalf of everyone in the group (and
everyone in the group is responsible for confirming they have a
submission on file by the deadline). See these instructions to add group
members to your Gradescope assignment submission.

Status Report

Note that there is no late deadline for this assignment!

due by 2025-11-25T23:59:00-05:00

Not only is the status report intended to keep the staff apprised of
your progress, it is an opportunity to keep yourself on track.

What to Do

1.  Go to CS50’s Gradescope page.
2.  Select Final Project: Status Report.
3.  Answer all questions therein.

If you are collaborating with other students, it is incumbent on one
member of the group to submit on behalf of everyone in the group (and
everyone in the group is responsible for confirming they have a
submission on file by the deadline). If unsure how to add Group Members
to your submission, follow the instructions from Gradescope.

Implementation

Gradescope will not allow you to upload your final implementation until
after the Status Report deadline has passed.

due by 2025-12-07T23:59:00-05:00

Ultimately due are implementation and documentation of your final
project. Your submission thereof must include all of the below.

1.  Documentation for your project in the form of a Markdown file called
    README.md. This documentation is to be a user’s manual for your
    project. Though the structure of your documentation is entirely up
    to you, it should be incredibly clear to the staff how and where, if
    applicable, to compile, configure, and use your project. Your
    documentation should be at least several paragraphs in length. It
    should not be necessary for us to contact you with questions
    regarding your project after its submission. Hold our hand with this
    documentation; be sure to answer in your documentation any questions
    that you think we might have while testing your work.
2.  A “design document” for your project in the form of a Markdown file
    called DESIGN.md that discusses, technically, how you implemented
    your project and why you made the design decisions you did. Your
    design document should be at least several paragraphs in length.
    Whereas your documentation is meant to be a user’s manual, consider
    your design document your opportunity to give the staff a technical
    tour of your project underneath its hood.
3.  Any and all files required to run your software (even if intended
    for some infrastructure other than cs50.dev), including source code
    as well as, if applicable, configuration files, Makefiles, sample
    inputs, SQLite databases, and so forth. Needless to say, all source
    code should be thoroughly commented.
4.  A short video (that’s no more than 3 minutes in length) in which you
    present your project to the world, as with slides, screenshots,
    voiceover, and/or live action, ideally with you yourself appearing
    in the video. Your video should somehow include your project’s
    title, your name and year, your dorm/house and concentration, and
    any other details that you’d like to convey to viewers. See CS1710’s
    tips on how to make a “screencast” though you’re welcome to use a
    phone or actual camera. Upload your video to YouTube as “public” or
    “unlisted” and include the URL of the video in your README.md file.

For your final project (and your final project only!) it is reasonable
to use AI-based software other than CS50’s own (e.g., ChatGPT, Claude,
Copilot, Gemini, et al.), but the essence of the work must still be your
own. You’ve learned enough to use such tools as helpers. Treat such
tools as amplifying, not supplanting, your productivity.

How to Submit

If your project requires (for execution and testing) hardware or
software other than that offered by VS Code, be sure that the the staff
are aware of and have approved your project’s needs.

Step 1 of 2

We recommend you upload your project at least once, prior to 11:00 PM
ET. Even if you make a subsequent upload later, at least you have a
submission on file if something goes wrong with the upload at the last
minute.

1.  Download a ZIP file of your final project by running
    zip -r project.zip * within your project’s folder in VS Code. Find
    the project.zip file in the file browser and right-click to choose
    Download. (If you created your final project outside of VS Code, you
    should still create a ZIP file of the project folder.)
2.  Go to CS50’s Gradescope page.
3.  Select Final Project: Implementation.
4.  Drag and drop your ZIP file to the area that says “Drag & Drop”.
5.  Click “Upload”.

Trouble uploading to Gradescope? (e.g. due to large file count/large
file size) Gradescope does have a soft file size limit when uploading
(if it times out, Gradescope will reject it). We recommend your ZIP be
no larger than 15MB if at all possible; you can probably help trend it
in this direction by, if needed, omitting any large assets like images
and any datasets that your project requires. At an absolute minimum, and
only if none of the above options work, you may upload your README.md
and DESIGN.md file to Gradescope, so long as your README.md includes a
link to your code files publicly accessible on, e.g., Google Drive,
Dropbox, GitHub (not to be edited after the deadline!), etc.

You should see a message that says “Final Project: Implementation
submitted successfully!”

If you are collaborating with other students, it is incumbent on one
member of the group to submit on behalf of everyone in the group (and
everyone in the group is responsible for confirming they have a
submission on file by the deadline). If unsure how to add Group Members
to your submission, follow the instructions from Gradescope.

Step 2 of 2

All members of your group should complete the below! (Or just you, if
you worked individually!)

Submit this form!

This last form is on the longer side, so no worries if you start it
before the deadline but finish a bit after.

And that’s it; you’ve finished. This was CS50!
