[The Peterman Post]

The Peterman Pod

Harvard Professor: CS50, What Matters More Than CS, Lecturing Well |
David J Malan

[]

1

[]

[]

[]

1×

[]

[]

[]

[]

0:00

Current time: 0:00 / Total time: -1:04:30

-1:04:30

Audio playback is not supported on your browser. Please upgrade.

Harvard Professor: CS50, What Matters More Than CS, Lecturing Well | David J Malan

[Ryan Peterman's avatar]

Ryan Peterman

May 11, 2026

[]

1

[]

[]

Share

[]

Transcript

David J. Malan is a Harvard professor known for turning CS50 into a
popular online computer science course. We discussed the story behind
CS50, how to lecture well, and how AI is changing CS education including
in cheating/academic dishonesty.

Check out the episode wherever you get your podcasts: YouTube, Spotify,
Apple Podcasts.

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Timestamps

[]

1:09 - Getting into computer science

3:27 - Becoming the professor of CS50

11:19 - How to lecture well

14:25 - Depth vs engagement in education

18:11 - Why don’t we consolidate educational resources

23:20 - Why start with C

31:51 - The ideal use of AI in education

34:54 - Cheating and AI

38:21 - Should we really learn CS still?

45:24 - College vs online education

47:06 - The most difficult concept to learn

51:00 - Growth vs fixed mindset

52:35 - The future of CS50

55:56 - Biggest career regret

1:00:29 - Top book recommendations

1:02:36 - Advice for his younger self

Transcript

[]

1:09 — Getting into computer science

[]

David:

[1:09] Yeah, it’s a really good question. So I was that problem set. My
first hello World program was in September of 1996 when I first stepped
foot in a class called CS50. I was a sophomore at the time and hadn’t
honestly gotten up the nerve until sophomore year to even consider
taking the class. Like when I came into college first year. And this is
a story I tell at the very start of CS50. Most years I really gravitated
toward fields that were more familiar, more comfortable for me and I
share with students that I really liked Constitutional law, like that
was my favorite class in high school.

[1:41] And I figured that meant when you get to college I should
probably major or concentrate as we say at Harvard, in government. And
so for the first year, year and a half, I was heads down focused on
studying government. But when I finally got up the nerve to follow some
friends, I think into the CS50 classroom that day when this very well
reputed computer scientist Brian Kernahan was at the helm for just that
one year, I was totally hooked.

[2:05] And it was the first time in like 19 years that homework was fun.
So much so that when the week’s problem sets or assignments would come
out, I would look forward to going back to my dorm on Friday evenings to
work through the night on my CS50 problem sets. So I felt like that was
a sign that I’m supposed to study computer science.

Ryan:

[2:22] And I, I saw on that assignment it says minus two and this little
there’s a little note there that I actually couldn’t quite quite make
out. Looking back now as the teacher, why did you get a minus two there?

David:

[2:35] It was something stupid and very easily redressible. But I did
not start off computer science or CS50 on the best foot. I got -2 out of
probably 2 points on hello World.

Ryan:

[2:46] I transcribed it and I tried to compile your program and it
didn’t compile interest.

David:

[2:52] Okay, so thanks, 30 years later I learn it should’ve been minus
3.

Ryan:

[2:55] Actually I was able to compile. It’s kind of interesting, but you
have to kind of force the compiler to do your bidding. It’s like void
main and you’re supposed to be like int main typically.

David:

[3:09] Typically. Now it has since been standardized in C99, which was
in my defense a version of C that did not exist in 1996. And nowadays we
use C11 or newer in CS50, so you probably had default compiler settings
on that did not like that old fashioned main signature. In my defense,
that part was correct.

3:27 — Becoming the professor of CS50

[]

Ryan:

[3:27] In 1996, what was the the story behind you going from a student
to the teacher?

David:

[3:34] Eventually I had an opportunity my senior year of college to
teach an introductory course in computer science at Harvard’s Extension
School, which is the continuing ed program largely for adults. The
course was literally called Introduction to Computers and the Internet,
because in 1999 we were still in the habit of introducing people to
computers and the Internet as opposed to taking it for granted more so
nowadays.

[3:54] And it was me. In a room full of hundred or so adults, I was
easily the youngest person in the room at like 21 years old. The story I
usually share is that that was the first and last time I wore suspenders
because I was so determined to project being older even though I was
still just a senior. But that really whet my appetite in turn not only
for more computer science, even though that was very introductory and
more technology focused for teaching.

[4:19] And over time I real over the next few years I realized that
doors would be closed to me if I wanted to teach at a place like Harvard
College. And I eventually returned to Harvard to do my PhD for five
years in computer science. And then in 2007 when I was finishing up, the
former professor, my own advisor, was moving on to be dean of the
school. And so there was this vacancy at the helm of CS50 and I somehow
talked my way into the job.

[4:43] They were interested in having a senior faculty member take over
the course. I guess they weren’t able to find someone that first year,
so I was meant to fill in for just one year until they found someone
else.

Ryan:

[4:57] when you took over CS50. It feels like the course completely
changed when you got into it. Was your first thought, I want to take
this online and kind of make all these major changes, or was that a
process over time?

David:

[5:14] Very much a process. And so what people see now is really a
evolution of the class, as opposed to some overnight revolution, so to
speak. The online aspect really started with Harvard Extension School,
since I was fortunate right place, right time to be teaching that
extension school course my senior year, when distance education, so to
speak, was becoming a thing. And my mentor and boss, Henry Leitner at
Harvard, offered me the opportunity not only to teach this class, but
also to put it online, I think in the year 2000, give or take.

[5:43] The very first year I taught it, spring of 1999, we were still
filming the class, but on VHS. And fun fact, at the time, it was the
course’s teaching fellows who were, in fact, my friends, who were also
undergraduates at the time, who, who were doing the filming and
operating a tripod with a camera. And I swear to God, we still have
footage, probably on some VHS tape of one of the cameras going when one
of my dear friends and teaching fellows fell asleep during the middle of
class.

[6:08] So we’ve aspired to higher production value since, but it was
really, it happened very organically. So once we started participating
in the extension school’s online education program for several years,
Apple released the iPod around 2003 or 4, give or take. And so at the
time, we were distributing the course’s video via real video and or real
audio, which are older technologies now, but were state of the art for
streaming at the time.

[6:35] We figured out a way how to sort of download all of those bits
for redistribution as MP3s initially and put them on itunes, which back
in the day you could upload, and maybe still today, your own RSS file,
which is a flavor of xml, which is kind of similar to HTML, but more
custom, that just describes what and where your audio files are. And we
made this available primarily for our own Harvard Extension School
students, because at the time, even though it was very progressive to
have streaming, it was a little annoying that you needed a constant
Internet connection.

[7:03] Buffering hadn’t really been invented yet. Certainly downloading
those videos was, by design not possible. But with podcasting, of
course, you could download the assets in advance. And for our own
students, the vision was that they could listen to the class only on
audio at the gym or during their commute and just generally make the
educational Content a little more accessible. A year or two later, Apple
released the video ipod.

[7:24] And so we very much steered into that and downloaded those same
assets, but in video form, to make them available on the video ipod and
people’s Macs and later PCs. And we were fortunate around that time,
early 2000s, where Wired magazine took notice and noted for us that we
were among the most popular podcasts in some category. And it was kind
of news to us that people cared. We did know that we were starting to
see bandwidth problems at the very early days.

[7:50] In the very early days, we were using Dreamhost to host the MP3
files. And Dreamhost had, I think, free accounts, but only up to some
number of megabytes per month. And we kept hitting the threshold. And so
what we would do is sign up for another DreamHost account, another
DreamHost account, another Dreamhost account. And we would use, like,
DNS trickery to just reroute the URLs in the RSS file to the new web
host to keep up.

[8:14] And so that’s when all of our attention sort of was drawn to the
possibilities and that we can make available this content not just for
our own students, but for anyone else who either geographically,
socioeconomically, couldn’t access that same kind of class.

Ryan:

[8:29] I see. So the idea was it was a supplementary material for people
who had paid for the Harvard Extension School and then. But other people
just open on the Internet could listen if they wanted.

David:

[8:41] Yeah. And that alone was a touchy subject on campus at first,
because here we were giving away the very thing that other people were
paying for. But at the end of the day, what people are paying for is the
additional support structure you get in a more traditional environment,
the more traditional credentialing, the transcript and the credit and so
forth. But the knowledge itself, it does society no good to withhold
that.

Ryan:

[9:01] I think so. I think this is a brutal reality of making content on
the Internet. There’s so much competition for attention that all the
content has to kind of hook people. Let’s say you’re scrolling on. On
Instagram. That first second’s really got to capture someone, otherwise
you’re going to go to the next one. And I’m curious, because you are
making content for the Internet with these lectures that you post
online.

[9:27] Do you think about, how can I, you know, hook the audience? Does
that ever factor into your. Your lecture design lectures?

David:

[9:35] No. Some of our social content, yes. Insofar as we are producing,
in addition to the courses traditional in classroom content, things that
are designed clearly for social media, whether it’s interviews, for
instance, whether it is excerpts from CS50‘s Fair, this exhibition of
final projects, whether it’s steering in the directions of some popular
meme just to sort of catch the attention of our own students or new
students.

[9:58] But we have been very deliberate over the years from the
beginning and especially since the age of the MOOC in 2012 when Coursera
and EDX and other platforms were coming around to not steer into this
bite sized 3 minutes, 5 minute chunks that I know there is data to
confirm that it drives engagement but not necessarily educational
outcomes. We have fairly unusually in recent years stuck to the more
traditional model of like CS50.

[10:27] Lectures are like three hours long. And there are downsides to
that. Absolutely. But ironically, online you avoid some of the in person
downsides because you can pause and rewind and fast forward, you can
search for something, open another tab, go down this intellectual rabbit
hole or rewind to figure out what it some detail you missed. I mean I, I
can’t even count how many times in college, high school, more generally
that I’m sure I zoned out.

[10:51] And it’s too often the case that if you miss some detail you’re
now you might as well leave the class at that point. And like online
solves that for you. And I haven’t seen a need pedagogically for us to
break up the content into such small pieces and to sort of take that
ownership away from the students. I think we’d prefer that they meet us
halfway. And if you need to take more than three hours to watch the
lecture, that’s totally fine.

[11:15] But it’s not designed for scrolling type consumption I would
say.

11:19 — How to lecture well

[]

Ryan:

[11:19] Right. What about in the, in the idea of like a long video,
there’s still this concept that you kind of want to keep people engaged.
And so how do you keep people engaged for a three hour lecture?

David:

[11:30] Yes. So that we are very conscious of and the way we’ve
generally described that is trying to create memorable moments. And this
is not for social media. This is as much for the in person audience as
it is for the online audience. And by memorable moments I mean in like
CS50‘s first lecture we do this bit where I’ll tear a phone book in half
to demonstrate the performance of something called binary search and
algorithm for finding information more quickly than linearly searching
the phone book one page at a time.

[11:55] And that’s really just to be dramatic. It has less and less
impact these days because most students of school age are no longer
familiar with the Technology known as a phone book. But it’s literally
analogous to the digital form in iOS or in Android, of course. And so it
doesn’t take a huge leap for someone to realize, okay, this is the
physical incarnation of that, and it’s just kind of fun, even though
it’s getting harder and harder to find the actual phone books.

[12:19] When we get to searching algorithms and sorting algorithms, we
very often have a student come up on stage, for instance, and for
sorting or for searching, we have a whole bunch of like gym lockers,
small versions thereof, that we put numbers in, either on printed paper
or little plastic numbers. And the goal is to have a student like, find
the number 50 or some other number that we’ve hidden behind the doors.

[12:38] And it’s an opportunity just to talk about either searching the
doors linearly, left to right, right to left, maybe randomly, maybe more
methodically as via binary search. If the numbers are sorted, that then
leads us to opportunities to talk about bubble sort and selection, sort
and insertion sorts. Algorithms that you probably wouldn’t bother
implementing or using in the wild because there’s more performant ones
certainly.

[12:59] But we use them as these pedagogical tools to explore the. The
problem to be solved, which is, all right, I can only use binary search
if the data is sorted, so how do I sort it? And how expensive is that
going to be worthwhile, the whole process in the get go? And so we’ll
have eight students come up on stage and sort themselves physically and
really perform in certain ways. And there’s so many examples of that
through CS50, we try to do at least one such thing every class.

[13:25] I mean, not unlike the way John Oliver, for instance, ends last
week. Tonight we’re trying to do some big song and dance, which
ironically is always at the end as the hook. We do try to put it maybe
toward the beginning of lecture or in the middle, but that’s not just
for engagement and not to make, to keep folks attention, but really to
latch onto their memories so that even if you’re in the weeds of this
introductory computer science course, there’s so much new information,
it’s the proverbial fire hose hitting you in the face you can cling to.

[13:52] Okay, all right. I remember like my. My roommate was literally
the one on stage acting out bubble sort. And you can kind of picture in
your mind’s eye what was happening. Or that phone book example is a
perfect one that years after leaving Harvard, we have alumni coming up
to us and saying, oh, I still REM the phone book demo. And those
memorable Moments, ideally theatrical in nature, I think are what brings
material, whether it’s CS or something else, to life.

[14:16] But that is very much to engage any learner, present or remote,
as opposed to being optimized for some technology.

14:25 — Depth vs engagement in education

[]

Ryan:

[14:25] One thing that I, I wonder because computer science is such a
dense topic where I guess there could be a trade off with, imagine
another style of lecture is, you know, there’s a chalkboard and you’re
up there kind of blandly writing out all of the information. I, I could
imagine you could go through much more depth in that case. Do you feel
like there’s any trade off there?

David:

[14:52] Absolutely. I mean, this is a criticism we get from some
students, particularly those with prior background or among those more
comfortable where do we really need 10 minutes on linear search or you
know, another 15 minutes on binary search? And the answer is quite
clearly no for those students. And even for most students, I would say
we do spend a disproportionate amount of time on certain cherry picked
topics that we do think lend themselves to this theatricality for really
getting students interested in fundamentally and excited by the material
to help motivate them the rest of the week when they’re going to be
spending 5, 10, 15, 20 plus hours on some weeks assignment and to help
them see sort of the forest for the trees, like what is actually
important and meaningful and fun about this.

[15:34] Because it’s probably not the keystrokes and the debugging and
the lower level implementation details. So we talk about this actually
in a paper, in a talk we gave at a CS education conference a few years
back, trying to find that balance between the theatricality and the
density of material. But to your question about dryness, I mean, I would
like to think that dryness really has no place in most forms of
education because then it could have been a book or it could have been
an email if it’s just someone reciting words, worse, writing things down
in ways that aren’t at all interactive, like do we really need to be all
in this room together?

Ryan:

[16:13] design to me in my research. And looking at the reception of
CS50 and people’s perspective on how you are as an educator, they
absolutely love your energy and like your delivery. Do you rehearse that
or is that something that you always had as an educator?

David:

[16:31] Yeah, I think it’s just sort of the expression you got to bring
your A game when you get up onto stage. And I think a lot of it honestly
comes from a place of insecurity. Like I really don’t want to be the one
on stage in front of a bored audience, like no one wants to be in that
situation. And so I think a lot of the energy that I try to bring to
bear and the excitement I show is really meant to one, make sure people
want to be and stay there for the duration of the class, whether it’s
short or long.

[16:56] And also help them see the excitement in and the possibilities
of, and the applicability of a field that I myself have fell in love
with so many years ago. Because then they can decide for themselves if
they feel that same emotion, if they too look forward to going home to
their dorm or their home on Friday nights and working on programming
assignments, of all things. But I feel like we certainly owe them, and I
think teachers owe students more generally educationally, the
opportunity to make that decision for themselves and to put forward our
best foot, or to present the field in the most exciting, inspiring way
that we can, if indeed we think it’s important that other people after
us study and research and apply these fields.

Ryan:

[17:40] I noticed this dichotomy in education when I was going to ucla,
which was there were roughly two types of professors that I had. There
was one type of professor that was beloved by the students and really
passionate at educating and kind of involved. And then there’s this
other type of professor which was really they might have been really
incredible and impressive as researchers, but their classes were really
poorly rated by all the students.

18:11 — Why don’t we consolidate educational resources

[]

[18:11] And with the online education that we can do today, I mean, like
CS50, all the resources are available. I could imagine that objectively
we could take the people who are most passionate about teaching and give
it to everyone, rather than having some teachers that are not excited
kind of consolidate. Imagine taking the world’s best instructor and
giving that to everyone. Why doesn’t consolidation happen if we have all
the technology for spreading literally the world’s best resources to
every situation?

David:

[18:41] Yeah, that’s a good question, since I think our own goal is
certainly not to put out of business other educators, other classes.
However, as a computer scientist, I would be among the first to notice
that there’s a huge inefficiency in the way education broadly works, not
only in this country, but presumably internationally as well, whereby
you have hundreds, thousands of teachers essentially all doing the same
thing in parallel, and not necessarily the meaningful part of
interacting with and uplifting and mentoring students, but like
preparing their presentations or their lecture notes, or writing the
assignments, or grading that work.

[19:17] There’s so much meta work involved in education that probably
doesn’t need to be borne by so many people that the computer scientist
in me invariably wants to factor that out somehow. And so I absolutely
think that we, educationally, as universities, as schools, should be
leaning on each other much more. I’d like to think that’s a lot of what
drives us in terms of CS50‘s own mission and the work that we do.

[19:39] But we too have encountered frictions along the way. It was very
unusual, for instance, for 10 years that we were collaborating with our
friends down the road in New Haven at Yale University where we were
offering CS50 on both campuses in parallel. And more recently we’ve been
doing this with some of our friends at Oxford and lifelong learning
group there. This is very much still the exception to the rule.

[19:59] Unfortunately, even after 10 plus years of MOOCs massive open
online courses, I dare say a lot of institutions, a lot of faculty are
very set in their ways. In fact, one of my regrets of the COVID era was
that we had this unprecedented opportunity now and almost mandate to
move everything online. And we therefore had this opportunity to say,
hey to Harvard students, why don’t you take this Stanford course or this
UCLA course or this Yale course, or this MIT course that you couldn’t
necessarily take in person for lack of transport or for lack of safety
at the time.

[20:32] And I could get no one on campus to, to get on board with this
idea of maybe offering one computer science course on this campus and
let the other students take it. Then you offer, as we did at Yale, like
a digital humanities class on some other campus and let the Harvard
students take it. And there’s just not much of an appetite, I dare say,
in higher education, if not education writ large for that resource
sharing.

[20:54] And I think there should be, I don’t think there should be one
computer science course, introductory course. I think some healthy
competition is a good thing. I don’t think there need to be thousands,
probably not hundreds, maybe dozens, from some of the best teachers. The
best schools would probably benefit us all if those same teachers then
were not put out of work, but then could lean on each other, use some of
the materials we’ve created, adopt or as we say, adapt some of our own
resources and treat education as a buffet of educational materials that
you can then make your own without having to do so much of the same
legwork and reinventing wheels across school and state lines.

Ryan:

[21:32] The mindset that you said, the computer scientist mindset of
getting rid of the redundancies and kind of consolidating resources, I
mean, it’s immediately logically obvious to me. But what would like,
let’s say there’s three top courses in America. There’s like MIT‘s,
there’s Stanfords and there’s Harvards and they want to give that to
other institutions, like, I don’t know, other colleges. What would stop
those colleges from taking an objectively better set of resources and
giving that to their students?

David:

[22:10] I sense, but I would defer to others who hold these views that
there is a concern that maybe we are putting ourselves out of business
or there’s more of a school pride. And I definitely saw some of that on
Harvard’s own campus where like, no, no, no, no. We should be offering
courses to our students that we have created and that we are teaching
and not lean, for instance, on our friends down the road at MIT who have
and have for decades had a larger, richer course catalog than us, simply
by nature of being a bigger place, at least for computer science.

[22:40] And it seems silly to me not to lean on each other. Maybe each
of us can specialize a bit more. Maybe each of us can offer slightly
different modes of instruction for students. Maybe that’s a little more
intimate on this campus versus that so as to really leverage shared
resources. I mean, this is done endlessly in research, having cross
campus collaborations and there’s something very personal about or very
fundamentally threatening.

[23:07] I think about leaning on each other educationally. And I wish
people would move away from this mindset because it doesn’t mean some
failure of the institution to offer these courses. It means we can do a
better job offering what resources we do have.

23:20 — Why start with C

[]

Ryan:

[23:20] I would like to think in designing the curriculum for CS50, how
did you pick C for instance? Because I think a lot of people would look
at that decision and think, I’m not going to use C in my day to day full
stack job, so why do I need to learn this?

David:

[23:36] Sure. So it was not picked by me per se, but I chose to keep C
in the course certainly since as far back as 1996 when Brian was
teaching it, Professor Margo Seltzer before that and many other faculty
prior to me and them. It is a wonderful foundation on which to build
your understanding of how a computer works and how software is built.
It’s about as close as you can get to the hardware before things
devolve, at least aesthetically into assembly code, which is much
scarier looking code.

[24:07] I think for most people, almost everyone perhaps, and certainly
beyond that is zeros and ones, which is not going to be fun for anyone.
So C kind of strikes, I think pedagogically this really nice balance of
having English like syntax and abstractions on top of lower level
primitives that allow you to explore procedural programming in
particular with some fundamental constructs that are now fundamental to
those kinds of languages.

[24:34] Loops and conditions and functions and variables and return
values and so forth. It’s sort of got, it’s got everything, but it’s
also a pretty small language and unless you download third party stuff,
there’s not a very large standard library in fact. So most anything you
want, you need to build yourself. And so we leverage this significantly
in CS50. So much so that by mid semester in week five of the class,
students are building their own hash tables.

[24:56] And we’re talking about how you could construct singly linked,
doubly linked lists, hash tables and tries trees, abstract data types
like stacks and queues and so many more. And what I think is especially
meaningful about C is that you can’t just instantiate one of those data
structures if you want one, like you can in Java and C with STL and
certain other libraries. Like if you want it, you’re going to have to
build it yourself.

[25:18] And I think that alone is a good educational exercise. Not
because you’re going to need to build that thing again, but because
there’s value, I think, in really understanding from the bottom up what
is going on inside of that device. So that one, you can make more
informed decisions as to how you want to engineer and design your own
data structures down the line. Two, you can diagnose problems by
reasoning through first principles what could possibly go wrong because
you understand how the data is being stored and what the algorithms are
that are performing on that data.

[25:50] And three, it’s a wonderful scaffold to higher level languages
because one of my favorite things from week 5 to 6 in CS50 is students
go from having written in week 5 like their own hash tables
implementation for adding data, retrieving data and so forth, which is
like this many lines of code for some font size and it gets whittled
down in week six to one line where you just instantiate a Python
dictionary and you can be productive with a dictionary.

[26:17] And many courses do teach programming by way of Python alone.
And we too have done it for some of our audiences. But you really never
get around to understanding what’s going on underneath the hood. And our
goal in CS50among them is not to output programmers, but engineers and
educated citizens and folks who really understand from first principles
how technology works. And so C for instance, strikes I think, just that
right balance.

[26:42] And for those students who want to go even deeper in a systems
class, they can go learn about assembly and compilers and so forth. But
those students who want to go on to web programming or data science
stuff or AI nowadays can just build on top of the C and then in turn
Python layers that we use in the class.

Ryan:

[27:50] This is not my perspective, but I was doing research and I saw a
YouTube video. It said, Whatever you do, don’t take CS50, clickbait,
whatever. Yeah. So I watched the video and the person. So it worked.
Yeah, it got me. It got me. And the perspective of the author of this
video was that CS50 teaches you all this stuff that you don’t really
need to know if you were like a full Stack engineer or something.

[28:15] If you, if I was just going into the industry and I’m just
making web apps that a lot of this underlying stuff you might not need
and maybe it’s not a good use of time. And I’m curious what you would
say to someone that has that mindset that you don’t need to actually
know how the computer works.

David:

[28:35] I don’t want to get into a whole Internet fight here, but I
think that is absolutely the wrong mindset, certainly for a full stack
engineer. I mean, by definition a full stack, you should be
understanding everything that’s happening among those layers. So I think
the better formulation isn’t that you don’t need to know these things,
but rather you won’t need to use these things. Use in a literal sense.

[28:56] Like I don’t. My C is a very popular language, even according to
some rankings each year it’s, you know, the number one, number two
language in terms of its omnipresence still to this day because it’s
very highly performant, albeit more challenging to write than some
languages. I only use C for five weeks during CS50 itself, but that
doesn’t mean that it hasn’t helped me understand higher level languages.

[29:19] What is going on inside of a system, how you can improve the
performance of or the design of some system by understanding again those
first principles. I don’t use Scratch except for one week out of the
year. I do use Python more frequently and I use JavaScript and some HTML
and CSS. But I think if you’re going to call yourself an engineer, you
should absolutely have mastery of and knowledge of those underlying
building blocks if you want to not just output something that frankly AI
could output nowadays, but you can understand and you can create the
next thing or the solution to some other problem that we haven’t even
yet solved.

[29:57] I think that’s the better mindset to appreciate. Yes, I’m not
going to need to use Scratch or C or maybe some of the other things we
touch on in CS50, but the knowledge and the principles that we extract
from those implementation details are incredibly valuable if you want to
be an engineer and not just say a coder, which is a distinction that
some folks might make.

Ryan:

[30:18] I was looking at the syllabus and there’s C obviously, and
there’s all the amazing, you know, basic data structures, those types of
things, bread and butter. And then in the end of the course there’s a
week on artificial intelligence, which I was surprised to see in an
intro course because it’s kind of like there’s no way that you could
teach AI in a week. So I’m assuming it’s a more high level introduction.

David:

[30:44] It is. It’s only for an hour and it technically temporarily,
it’s offered in the middle of the semester for the on campus students.
It coincides by design with family weekend when first years and juniors
students, parents come to town very frequently. And so we do it as a
very broad introduction to what everyone is talking about nowadays in
the AI space. There are full fledged classes of course at Harvard and
other institutions that students can take and it’s really meant to whet
their appetite but also give them some context for the very tools we’re
using in CS50.

[31:14] We have this virtual rubber duck that’s built on top of OpenAI‘s
APIs and Microsoft Azure’s web API service that they’re using every day
or every week certainly throughout CS50. So among the goals
pedagogically is to help them Understand how do the tools work that you
yourself have been using. Two, to help them understand what is it that
the world is talking about nowadays. And three, prepare them to use
these tools more effectively by the end of the semester.

[31:38] Because for instance, for CS50‘s final project, students are
encouraged and welcome to use Claude or ChatGPT or Gemini or any number
of off the shelf AI tools, though we don’t allow those through policy
for the course’s assignments.

31:51 — The ideal use of AI in education

[]

Ryan:

[31:51] Yeah, I had a conversation with another professor and
specifically about, you know, is AI affecting how the kids are learning?
And his perspective was it was kind of maybe he didn’t do it properly
and the students were over relying on it. And I think that is a concern
that a lot of people have, is that students these days can be more brain
dead. Like you could just go to ChatGPT and say, honestly just solve the
problem for me.

[32:21] For you as an educator in computer science, what is the ideal
relationship with AI for your students?

David:

[32:28] Yeah, so this virtual Rubber Duck at CS50AI, which anyone with a
free GitHub account can use, is really meant by design to be a less
helpful version of ChatGPT, one that is also more tuned to CS50‘s own
material and syllabus and so forth. And that’s because all of these
tools off the shelf can pretty much do your homework for you. And this
has been true for several years, even before the fall of 2022 when
ChatGPT came out.

[32:52] I mean we were looking closely at GitHub Copilot for some time
because if you created an empty text file in VS code called Mario C
which is the file name we use for one of CS50‘s problem sets. And if you
so much as type I think hash and then I for include, you pretty much get
a suggestion to autocomplete the entirety of that particular problem
set. And that’s just because, I mean we, for better for worse are part
of these models insofar as the OpenCourseWare has presumably been
slurped up, as with the rest of the Internet, as part of the training
data, so to speak, for these AI models.

[33:23] So that has both good and bad. And that’s why we set out to make
our own sort of duck themed version of these tools that puts downward
pressure on that willingness of the tools to be too helpful. And we’ve
tried to attune the duck to be more akin to a good teacher or tutor that
leads you to the solution, but certainly doesn’t auto complete your
whole way through it. I see.

Ryan:

[33:42] So there’s like a system prompt or some scaffolding that says,
don’t answer the question but help me figure it out.

David:

[33:50] Pretty much. And it’s much easier to do this now than it was in
2022 and 2023 when we first rolled this out. Which is to say there’s a
lot of tools, even commercial tools, that faculty can use to do the same
kind of thing for their own course. For us, it was important to draw a
clean line in the sand to students because you could approximate this
duck by just telling students, hey, everyone, go copy paste this system
prompt as you describe into ChatGPT before you ask your homework
question.

[34:16] And no one’s going to do that. And like it’s going to drift out
of date and it just feels too clunky. Students are just going end up
typing into the prompt. Whereas I think it’s a lot cleaner, if not
simpler to know. I cannot, through policy, go to ChatGPT, Gemini,
Copilot, any of these things, but I can go to and use as much as I want
CS50AI or the plugin we have in VS code of the same. And that to me is a
very healthy line because, you know, if you’re crossing that line, if
you’re pulling up chatgpt.

[33:50] com or gemini. google. com and the like. And at that point, it’s
a conscious choice to be academically dishonest, as we would describe it
in CS50‘s syllab.

34:54 — Cheating and AI

[]

Ryan:

[34:54] When I was going through my CS education, cheating was already
pretty rampant. I mean, people put their code on GitHub and you kind of
paraphrase someone else’s code. Well, not me, but other people. And I
imagine with the new technology that actually, I mean, with anything
with cheating, it’s adversarial. There’s people who are cheating and
there’s people who are trying to catch the cheaters. Right.

[35:19] I could imagine that the cheating tools are advancing faster
than the ability to catch them because if you just generate the code,
it’s not easy to say, oh, that was, you know, AI generated or whatever.
So I’m curious if you see more cheating on your end.

David:

[35:41] of dishonesty, statistically, we are not catching more. I would
like to think that the, the misbehavior has not markedly increased, if
only because we, like a lot of intro courses around the world, have a
tradition of looking for academic dishonesty, plagiarism, code that was
copied and pasted off the Internet or YouTube video. And we within CS50,
like a lot of peer institutions are very good at catching that.

[36:08] And like, we have tools that cross compare all of students
submissions against each other against GitHub repositories of past
submissions that we have of YouTube videos that have been just
transcribed. So we have historically administratively disciplined, so to
speak, between 5 and 10% of CS50 student body every semester. And that’s
kind of a norm among across peer institutions, you know, upper bound of
roughly 10%.

[36:31] There’s certainly probably some percentage of students who have
been cheating in some form all these years and never have been detected.
But just based on the rigor with which we go through this, the messaging
throughout the course, like I’d like to think that a good 90% of
students are behaving in the way that they should, at least when the
boundaries are set through not only policy, but course culture and
through the support structure that we provide to students.

[36:56] That said, we’ve not seen an uptick in detections of academic
dishonesty. What has gotten harder is the so called prosecution of those
cases in the sense that it’s harder for us now to hand to the
administrative board of Harvard or the Honor Council, so to speak, be a
smoking gun. Like, here is the URL from which this code was copied,
because it’s not really coming from a URL or a YouTube video, it’s
coming from the composition of all of the URLs out there and all of the
YouTube videos about CS50‘s problem sets.

[37:26] Because the AI, somewhat pseudo randomly is spitting out an
amalgam of these various training inputs. That said, when you’ve been
doing this long enough, like you can tell that this is not the work of
this particular student either in comparison to past work that they
submitted or, or the sophistication with which they’re solving a problem
or the incorrectness with which they’re solving the problem.

[37:49] And there’s often telltale signs like this is not this year’s
problem set, this is last year’s. And so clearly this did not come from
you alone. So we certainly are able to detect the easier to detect
behaviors, right?

Ryan:

[38:02] 5 to 10%. That feels spiritually like a lot like 1 out of 10
students doing something. But I mean, you have the.

David:

[38:12] Yeah, I mean, 20 years ago I probably would have agreed after
seeing it year after year after year. I’m just glad it’s not higher than
that.

38:21 — Should we really learn CS still?

[]

Ryan:

[38:21] On the topic of AI, a lot of students, they see where these,
these agentic tools are going. They’re generating code that is
superhuman in many cases. And I think it gives people this sense of
dread. Like imagine you’re spending all this time getting better at
programming and you think that maybe programming will be useless in the
future. You know, if an anxious student comes to you and says, I don’t
know if I should be learning computer science, what would you say?

David:

[38:50] I wouldn’t worry about getting better at programming. The whole
point of so many of these courses has been about getting better at
problem solving. And like that is a life skill, whether you’re going to
stay in CS or tech more generally, or leave it for some other field in
which there’s still going to be problems, just different types of
problems. And there too is why we, we constantly tell students the
course is not about Scratch and C and Python and JavaScript.

[39:14] Like these are all implementation details. And while they
definitely have and consciously have pedagogical value, that’s why
they’re in the syllabus. The goal is not to teach students Scratch and C
and Python and JavaScript, but how to solve problems and to give them
representative tools with which they can solve those problems and also
an understanding of those same first principles from which they can
reason about some symptom they’re seeing or some problem they are
ultimately trying to solve.

[39:39] AI is pretty darn good already at generating code. It’s only
going to get better. But that’s wonderful insofar as it’s going to save
us humans from the stuff that was never very fun to begin with. Even I
am guilty of never really writing as many like unit tests for my code to
test the correctness automatically. That stuff can be very easily and
robustly generated nowadays. What I don’t want the computer to take from
me is sort of the fun part of that.

[40:03] The fun part that’s always been there, which is the designing of
the system itself. Maybe thinking about what the UX should be so that
you can optimize for the user experience, or what the database design
might be or what data you want to collect in pursuit of some business
problem. Because you know you’re going to need to analyze or mine it for
some valuable insight later on. Like that stuff’s probably not going
away anytime soon.

[40:25] And the other reassurance I would give students nowadays is like
the world is only getting more technological. And we’ve kind of seen
this pattern before. Where I took CS50, for instance, at really the peak
of the so called. com era era, so 1996. And then sort of the world
started trending down when all the startups were going out of Business
and students were exiting computer science. But like then, the pendulum
swung back and I don’t think we have saturated the world in terms of
technology.

[40:50] Every business, small and large is probably going to keep using
it more and more. We in our personal lives are only going to keep
needing it more and more. And so, like, those are problems to be solved.
And yes, I don’t think we’ll need as many humans to write HTML and CSS
anymore, which was, at the risk of picking another fight, never that
much fun anyway. And maybe we won’t really need to use C or Python
anymore, but we can start programming like a pm, a product manager,
using our voice, using our words in English or some other human
language, but that alone would be wonderful.

[41:20] Case in point, I was playing with Claude this morning to just
help me prototype something, and it was wonderful for me to be able to
just think about the problem and sort of the engineering side of it and
say, all right, Claude, much like an intern, please go implement this
for me. Because I really don’t want to go reading the documentation,
which was never that intellectually interesting. I could if I wanted to,
and I understand how it’s structured, but I don’t need to keep repeating
that kind of exercise again and again.

[41:44] But at least in the near term, case in point, Claude came back
very confidently with a solution that was like 90% correct. And I had to
convince Claude, so to speak, by chatting back with it that, like, no,
no, no, no, like this is not possible per the API docs at this URL. So
of course you get the apologetic response from the LLM and this kind of
error rate or hallucination will decrease with frequency.

[42:08] But, like, this is why the human should stay in charge for some
time.

Ryan:

[42:12] In today’s environment, we can relatively confidently say, these
tools empower us and they don’t replace fully yet. But I think a lot of
people are worried about, okay, but what if, you know, it gets. What if
it gets even better? What if that 90% becomes 99% or maybe it becomes
100%? Then I think people get scared, but it’s hard to say exactly in
the future.

David:

[42:39] But insofar as our goal within even a class like CS50 has always
been to output a more educated citizenry, to teach students how to teach
themselves, to teach them how to be more methodical, more algorithmic
and problem solving, like all of that is valuable, whether or not we
have robots doing work for us in our future.

Ryan:

[42:59] I think you talked about the enrollment rates and I have this
little screenshot because you had written this, I think, this paper from
long time ago about redesigning CS50. And you kind of, I’ll put this
overlay this in the video, but you know, there’s this trend of kind of
enrollment rates going up and then they tank with the top convobole and
then they went up as well because of some adjustments that you’ve made.

[43:25] Right now we’re kind of in this. You know, AI is really shifting
things. How if you were to continue this graph forward, is enrollment
and interest in computer science declining because of the AI?

David:

[43:39] Oh, lately that absolutely seems to be the case. And that was
preceded, I think over the past few years really by the downturn in tech
offerings. I mean, we were seeing this in the recruiting pipeline on
campus where there were just fewer opportunities and there was less of
an appetite among some of the big tech companies to even bother coming
to campus if they just didn’t have many entry level roles for students.

[43:58] And that was before ChatGPT and similar tooling was sort of
omnipresent. So AI has only exacerbated, I think, that concern. But I
think what we’re going to see if we sort of extrapolate out is that
there’s going to be these ebbs and flows over the years, much like we’ve
seen, or the pendulum swinging each different way, whichever metaphor
you prefer. Just as humans have this tendency, I do think, especially in
tech, to overreact to things both positively and negatively.

[44:24] And while AI is absolutely here to stay, I do think it’s going
to become equivalent in our minds to just what technology is. AI is a
nice sort of buzzword and way to distinguish it from some of the more
deterministic or predictable outcomes that like technology to date has
maybe had. But. But I think back Even over my 19 years with CS50 and AR
and VR was to be all the rage. And then we had blockchain and bitcoin
and Google Glass even excited the imagination like no other technology
at the time.

[44:56] And all of these things are still with us in some form or some
future incarnation. And especially with blockchain and bitcoin. There’s
some resiliency there. And AR and VR still very omnipresent in games.
But it’s just been fascinating to watch the world, the tech world,
especially the VC world, sort of react and overreact habitually to these
kinds of things. Until we sort of find a healthier medium where people
appreciate the real value and not just the opportunistic value of it
all.

45:24 — College vs online education

[]

Ryan:

[45:24] You’re in a unique position because you teach the in person
Harvard class and then you also do the massively online version as well.
And I think it’s an interesting case study because some people have the
opinion that, that the important part of college is actually not the
education. And it feels like this in person version versus the online
one is kind of proof of that, which is that you could not go to Harvard
but get a world class education, yet the outcomes are very different.

[46:01] So I’m curious your thoughts on going to college versus getting
the world class education for free?

David:

[46:09] Yeah, I think it depends on your goals. I think there’s
absolutely value of places like Harvard really because of that
credentialing. And also it’s a filter from the get go. I mean these
admissions departments are already identifying strengths among people
and sort of the audience you then end up with is very similar along
certain axes, certainly along academic abilities and whatnot. But the
value of places like Harvard I do think has long been the networking
opportunities, the connections you make, the life experiences you might
have and academics sometimes to a fault like is often secondary.

[46:39] But when it comes to knowledge and learning outcomes and
practical skills, I mean I’d like to think that you’re getting as good,
if not better an experience taking a class like CS50 online, if only for
the simple technological reasons that you can pause and fast forward and
rewind and open multiple tabs, go down this intellectual rabbit holes in
ways that a traditional campus is just not designed to support.

[47:02] Unless those same students are are taking the class in their
dorm rooms or at home.

47:06 — The most difficult concept to learn

[]

Ryan:

[47:06] Like during COVID You’ve taught so many years of this same
material. What is the most difficult concept that you see? People
consistently having trouble pointers in C.

David:

[47:19] And that was true for me 30 years ago. So much so that I’m
always very weirdly excited to tell students in class nowadays that I
still remember where I was on campus the day I finally got pointers and
and I’ll share here. I was in one of the dining halls on campus with my
teaching fellow or TF who himself was a student probably one or two
years older than me. We were sitting at the back of the dining hall on
these wooden tables in this beautiful old school sort of Harvard esque
room.

[47:47] And somehow or other something he said that day, after weeks of
struggling, that light bulb went off for me and I’m like oh, it’s just
an address which you know, never quite clicked. Even though I’m sure
many people tried to hammer that into me previous to that. But. But it’s
just hard like memory Stuff is hard, especially if computers to students
from the get go is very much this black box, this abstraction itself.

[48:09] To really go down to that level takes some, some new thinking.
And it took me a while.

Ryan:

[48:15] Let’s say someone is trying to help someone else grasp a
difficult concept. Like, what’s your best tip on how to really teach
someone something that they’re really struggling with?

David:

[48:26] My instinct is to say metaphors, or what we more broadly call
memorable moments, where it’s a phone where you’re trying to teach
binary search, or even a Screenshot of the iOS context app where you’re
trying to introduce the same algorithm. It’s during COVID for instance,
we worked with a local theater and we had seven physical doors on a
stage that were from previous plays that they had put on. And we put
fuzzy little numbers behind that the prop shop had kindly developed for
us so that we could play that same game of using not lockers, but
physical doors.

[48:56] And creating those binary doors for students, I think helps them
latch onto a visual that makes a very esoteric topic that, that frankly,
who really cares about binary search day to day just kind of come alive
and you realize, at least back in the day of actual phone books, like,
oh, I’ve been using this the whole time. I just didn’t know what to call
it. And I think that’s very empowering to use metaphors to create
memorable moments that help students realize that even the seemingly
most arcane topics are still very much within their grasp and perhaps
not so dissimilar.

[49:28] Even when we talk about binary for students, we like to show
them that, hey, here’s a number, like 123. Well, why is it 123? Because
there’s the ones place, the tens place, the hundreds place, and so
forth. Hey, guess what? Binary is the exact same methodology, but you
just have the ones place, the twos place, the fours place, and so forth.
And helping people realize, like, oh, like that’s all it is, I think is
very empowering because suddenly they feel like they’re part of the
conversation and they actually know what they’re talking about all the
more, even when they thought that was a domain for those more
comfortable only.

51:00 — Growth vs fixed mindset

[]

Ryan:

[51:00] I’m curious if you think that there’s anyone that’s just born
that can’t learn computer science, and that’s not the world that I want
to live in, but let’s just say you have someone and you explain a race
to them a hundred times, and they kind of don’t get the concepts. Do you
feel everyone can grow and learn computer science?

David:

[51:25] I think to an extent. I mean, if you, if it’s still not sinking
in after 100 times, like, I mean, frankly, I think good educational
advice would be like, maybe this isn’t the field for you, and this is
how you’ve been empirically figuring that out. If it’s just not clicking
in a way that’s exciting you, that’s making you happy, then, okay, stop
beating yourself up. Like, find something else that’s of interest to
you.

[51:43] But if you’re struggling and you’re thinking of being up after 2
times, 10 times, 49 times, I’m not quite sure where the cutoff is. Like,
you should probably continue to try to power through, not necessarily by
taking that same approach, but find some other class, some other
professor, some other teaching assistant, some other book to try a
different perspective or angle on it. Because maybe you’re just not
jiving with, like, the form of instruction or the style of the teacher,
myself included.

[52:10] So I wouldn’t give up thinking it’s you alone. And I do think,
too, that’s really the secret ingredient. Is time. Like, fine, if you
don’t. If you can’t quite finish the course in 12 weeks, take 24, take
52. Like, that’s perfectly fine. Especially if you’re juggling other
things. This isn’t necessarily your primary focus. I think time is a
perfectly reasonable knob to turn. And I think that puts it well within
reach of so many other people.

52:35 — The future of CS50

[]

Ryan:

[52:35] CS50 is beloved. People have. The reception online is so
overwhelmingly positive, and you’ve been doing it for so long. What is
next with CS50? Like, do you see yourself kind of of continuing the same
curriculum for the next decade, or will things change?

David:

[52:54] Yeah, I think CS50 itself will continue to evolve as it. As it
long has. I do think it’ll continue to change both in terms of tooling
and concepts, as AI sort of permeates our lives and technology all the
more. That said, I think it’s always meant to be this introductory
course in problem solving. So I think there will be this backbone that
remains and has been there even since my day. Even though the problem
sets are very different nowadays, the style of the lectures is very
different.

[53:18] If you really compare the syllabus from fall of 1996 versus now
and what will be fall 2026 like, they’re not that fundamentally
different. They’re just packaged very differently and stylized, I think
very differently. But there’s a lot of knowledge and conceptual
framework and practical skills that are very invariant over the years.
What we have been doing in recent years, though, is steering in the
direction of developing all the more of a complete curriculum.

[53:43] So courses that students can take for free online through
OpenCourseWare after CS50. Earlier courses, gentler courses that
students can take before CS50 itself, or even instead of CS50 itself,
depending on the goals that they have and the background that they’re
bringing to bear. The plan in the near term is to branch out beyond
computer science, working with a colleague of ours, Tom Crawford, at the
University of Oxford, on courses in maths, or maths, as he says, in all
sorts of fields, so as to help uplift students who are taking, say,
computer science courses, but don’t have the requisite math background
that might be ideal to have, so that you don’t struggle with certain
things that, that we might otherwise just take for granted.

[54:22] Beyond that, STEM more broadly is of interest. And while we’re
not experts ourselves, working with colleagues of ours in the arts and
humanities and trying to bring this form of theatricality and these
memorable moments to a stage, but with far more people and subjects than
me and mine.

Ryan:

[54:38] When you mention math and these other subjects, it kind of
reminds me, I mean, I haven’t been in the schooling system for a long
time, but that Khan Academy was like a very popular resource. I, I
imagine that’s still around. And so that would be, I guess, a
competitor.

David:

[54:53] I do think some healthy competition is good, as if it drives
different courses, different teachers to sort of try new things and
teach differently. But I think the more the merrier. The world only
benefits from more educational resources.

Ryan:

[55:05] And so if those are, let’s say I’m okay, let’s say I’m a parent
and I’m deciding, should I, I put my high schooler in the Khan Academy
learning track of math or what you plan to offer?

David:

[55:18] From what I’ve seen, certainly of Khan Academy’s work is that
they’re like ours, I think is more of a cast of characters, at least on
video form, at least. I know the earliest of Saul Khan’s work was sort
of the handwritten style for his niece or nephew, which was wonderfully
compelling and engaging. I think we stylistically are just very
different. And I think we try across CS50‘s courses traditionally to
have a shared aesthetic, a shared pedagogical style, a shared lecturing
style.

[55:47] So that when you take a CS50 course, so to speak, you sort of
know what you’re getting because it’s very similar in spirit to the
others in the ecosystem.

55:56 — Biggest career regret

[]

Ryan:

[55:56] Coming to the end, when you look back on your career, what is
your biggest regret?

David:

[56:01] I would say I wish someone had told me, or I wish I had known to
just calm down. Like, at least when I was in university, I was one of
these students who again came in thinking I was going to major in
something else, government, in my case. I was one of those students who
went to my first RA meeting, proctor meeting, advisor meeting with
probably on a sheet of paper, all 32 courses I thought I was going to
take at Harvard, which did not come to pass.

[56:25] But it really led me astray in some way the first year and a
half of school, and that I was really focused on crossing requirements
off the list, taking the courses I thought I should. And it wasn’t till
sophomore year that I took CS50, which was eye opening and allowed me to
start to pivot. But even then I hadn’t broken out of that mold probably
until senior fall, senior spring, when I finally took an Introduction to
Latin course, which was just for fun and was just so interesting and eye
opening.

[56:51] And I finally understood aspects of English and Spanish
retroactively that I never really had mastered when taking those same
classes is I took a course on Dramatic Arts 101, which was a survey
class on theater and writing and set design and acting. And pretty much
every elemental aspect of theater was introduced in this class. And I
wish I had thought to take a class like that. And even in graduate
school I was Only gradually learning this lesson finally audited
essentially a course in archeology which was so much fun, so much so I
had this existential crisis, thinking maybe I should have gone to a PhD
in archeology instead.

[57:26] But I stayed with CS and I just wish someone had told me to calm
down early on and sort of explore more, particularly areas in which I
thought I’d be less comfortable. And that’s at least a message I try to
give to students nowadays. As for professional regrets, thankfully
relatively few come to mind, if anything. You know, I used to joke, even
with some of our own TAs, that insofar as I’ve largely stayed in
academia, you know, I’ve never had a like a real job, but as recently as
a recent sabbatical, I spent a whole semester or essentially interning
with GitHub as a professor in residence and learning the ropes of a real
world software engineering company and having access to the internal
issues and bug reports and feature requests and sitting in as a fly on
the wall to some of the team meetings and design chats.

[58:14] And it was so much fun to actually live the life that we’ve been
teaching about for so long. And there too, I wish I had done that
earlier or at least in parallel had done maybe more consulting
opportunities or done a little bit more in the real world before coming
back to school and then staying in school.

Ryan:

[58:32] Did you ship a project or like what was that time at GitHub?
Like, what was the.

David:

[58:36] It wasn’t. I don’t think I contributed code. I definitely
contributed issues and bug reports and feature requests. My sort of role
was to be this educational voice at the table, especially in the design
of certain products and to at least speak up on behalf of of educational
use cases. Give teachers a voice at the table when it comes to certain
features that would really make the student experience better,
particularly in tools like VS code, albeit on the Microsoft side, or
some of the internal GitHub tooling.

[59:05] So I don’t think you’ll find any code that I wrote, but
hopefully one of my issues underlies some code that’s now in the code
base.

Ryan:

[59:13] What about looking back on your time doing CS50? Like if you
were to just reflect on what went well and what didn’t go well, just the
highlights of, you know, your time running the course. What, what would
you say?

David:

[59:28] I think it’s been very meaningful. So much so that it’s become
our mission organically to have this now tradition of OpenCourseWare
that wasn’t certainly our own idea. It was really inspired by our
friends down the road at MIT who really championed this decades ago, but
very happy with how that has evolved because it’s made the work all the
more meaningful in ways that go beyond just education, but helping, as
we’ve heard anecdotally from some of our students out there, very
professional impacts, life impacts, being able to better care for your
family or to pivot professionally into a field that you didn’t think was
for you like that has just been very meaningful and rather makes it all
worthwhile.

[1:00:09] And I hope too, in so far as we’ve been a bit unusual both
with our production value and openness, trying to sort of offer an
example that others could follow that, hey, maybe more people should be
doing, doing this, more people should be sharing, leaning on us, us
leaning on them. Because I do think that’s still a missed opportunity
educationally.

1:00:29 — Top book recommendations

[]

Ryan:

[1:00:29] What’s your best technical book recommendation? If someone
wants to learn programming or if there’s maybe some other topic that you
recommend a book for, I’d love to hear it.

David:

[1:00:38] My favorite book is Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy and I
think everyone should read that or play the terminal based video game
that existed when I was growing up of it. It funny enough, within CS50‘s
courses it’s been a few years since we officially recommended any books.
This is partly consistent with our commitment to openness and for
everything being free so that there isn’t some financial barrier to
someone out there to needing a textbook for the course.

[1:01:04] That said, over the years and to this day, some of my favorite
tech books, even though they’re increasingly outdated, are this
brilliantly colorful, picturesque, easy to understand and accessible
book called How Computers Work, which we used in that course I first
taught in 1999 and how the Internet Works. And I think they eventually
stopped updating them some years ago. But they were such wonderful
educational tools.

[1:01:31] I think every subject should have a book that looks quite like
that. More arcanely, there’s a book that we still recommend to students
unofficially or if they really want to go pursue something, something
more arcane in C called the Hacker’s Delight, which is this wonderful
hardcover book that just has really neat bit trickery and low level
hacks, low level techniques you can use to make your C code especially
all the more performant.

[1:01:56] So there’s a lot of value in a book like that. But I think
back years ago to when I was learning some stuff in technology and like
the four Dummies books was great. I think for some time we might have
recommended one of the Complete Idiots Guides or something like that,
which doesn’t have the best semantics. But the reality is they are by
design written for a very broad, accessible audience, and I think that
has a lot of value as opposed to the more traditional textbook where you
sort of have to have taken the class in order to understand the book.

Ryan:

[1:02:24] Is there an official textbook for the Harvard CS50? Not the
open one. Okay, so that one also has the.

David:

[1:02:31] Other than having access to a computer and the Internet,
there’s no. No financial requirements.

1:02:36 — Advice for his younger self

[]

Ryan:

[1:02:36] That’s great. I love that idea. Last question for you is if
you could go back to the beginning of your career and kind of give
yourself some advice, what would you say?

David:

[1:02:46] Explore more. I do think I wish I had more jobs under my belt
early on, which I think was the result of my being pulled back into
choosing to go back into academia. I think it would have been healthy if
I had allowed myself maybe another year or two in between undergrad and
graduate school. Or it probably would have worked out well if CS50
hadn’t opened up for me right as I was finishing my PhD, because then I
probably would have gone off to industry for some amount of time.

[1:03:16] That said, not sure I would have gotten the job if I had
wandered off campus at that point. So it probably worked out for the
best. But I had such fun when I was interning, interning, so to speak,
at GitHub, that it would be fun to live more of the lives that some of
my friends in tech have lived.

Ryan:

[1:03:31] Awesome. Well, thank you so much for your time. I really
appreciate it. David.

David:

[1:03:34] Yeah, thanks so much.

Discussion about this episode

Comments

Restacks

[User's avatar]

[The Peterman Post]

The Peterman Pod

Sharing the transparent career stories of technical people

Sharing the transparent career stories of technical people

Subscribe

Listen on

Substack App

Apple Podcasts

Spotify

YouTube

RSS Feed

Appears in episode

[Ryan Peterman's avatar]

Ryan Peterman

Recent Episodes

[]

[]

Casey Muratori: Surprises In Computer History And Where Bad Code Comes
From

Sep 14 • Ryan Peterman

[]

[]

How Anthropic Builds And How Engineering Will Change Soon | Thariq
Shihipar

Sep 7 • Ryan Peterman

[]

[]

Creator of Scala: Comparing Languages And How AI Will Impact Them |
Martin Odersky

Aug 31 • Ryan Peterman

[]

[]

Sergey Levine: Current State of Humanoid Robotics, China & Future
Predictions

Aug 24 • Ryan Peterman

[]

[]

Creator of TypeScript: 10x Faster Typescript, Why AI Won't Replace SWEs
| Anders Hejlsberg

Aug 17 • Ryan Peterman

[]

[]

Creator of Lean: Handwritten Math Will Change Dramatically | Leonardo de
Moura

Aug 10 • Ryan Peterman

[]

[]

Creator of Lua: Scripting, Programming Languages, Predictions | Roberto
Ierusalimschy

Aug 3 • Ryan Peterman

[]

[]

Turing Award Winner: Early AI, LLM Predictions, Causality | Judea Pearl

Jul 27 • Ryan Peterman

Ready for more?

Subscribe
