17-214/514

Fall 2025

- Course calendar
- Schedule
- Staff
- Syllabus
- Piazza

Principles of Software Construction Objects, Design, and Concurrency

Overview

Software engineers today are less likely to design data structures and
algorithms from scratch and more likely to build systems from library
and framework components. In this course, students engage with concepts
related to the construction of software systems at scale, building on
their understanding of the basic building blocks of data structures,
algorithms, program structures, and computer structures. The course
covers technical topics in three areas: (1) concepts of design for
complex systems, (2) object oriented programming, and (3) concurrent and
distributed software. Student assignments involve engagement with
complex software and commonly used libraries and frameworks.

After completing this course, students will:

- Be comfortable with object-oriented concepts and with programming in
  the Java or TypeScript / JavaScript language
- Have experience designing medium-scale systems with patterns
- Have experience testing and analyzing your software
- Understand principles of concurrency and distributed systems

See a more detailed list of learning goals describing what we want
students to know or be able to do by the end of the semester. We
evaluate whether learning goals have been achieved through assignments
and exams.

Coordinates

M/W 11:00 - 12:20 p.m. in Tepper Building (TEP) 1403

Hammad Ahmad, TCS 341, office hours: see calendar. (I generally have an
open door policy: if my office door is open and no-one else is meeting
with me, I am happy to answer any questions. Feel free to also email me
for appointments; I can meet with you in-person or via Zoom.)

Our TAs also provide additional office hours each week; see details in
the calendar.

Calendar

Schedule

The schedule below reflects our current plans, but will be updated
throughout the semester.

Date

Topic

Reading assignments*

Mon, Aug 25

Intro, IDEs, Build Systems, CI, Libraries

Wed, Aug 27

OO basics, Dynamic dispatch, Encapsulation

Fri, Aug 29

Lab 1 Course Infrastructure Setup

Mon, Sep 1

No Class, Labor Day

Wed, Sep 3

OO Analysis and UML

Fri, Sep 5

Lab 2 Encapsulation

Mon, Sep 8

HW 1 due Flash cards (Intro to OO and Libraries)

Mon, Sep 8

Responsibility Assignment

UML and Patterns, Ch. 9-11, 15-16

Wed, Sep 10

Inheritance and Delegation

Fri, Sep 12

Lab 3 Inheritance and Delegation

Mon, Sep 15

Design Patterns

UML and Patterns, Ch. 17-18

Wed, Sep 17

Design Practice

Fri, Sep 19

Lab 4 Design and UML

Mon, Sep 22

HW 2a due Santorini: Intro to Design

Mon, Sep 22

Refactoring and Anti-patterns

Wed, Sep 24

Midterm 1

Fri, Sep 26

Lab 5 Refactoring and Anti-patterns

Mon, Sep 29

HW 2b due Santorini: Peer Review

Mon, Sep 29

Specifications and Unit Testing, Exceptions

Wed, Oct 1

Test Case Design

Fri, Oct 3

Lab 6 Unit Testing

Mon, Oct 6

Testability

Wed, Oct 8

HW 3 due Testing

Wed, Oct 8

Introduction to Concurrency

Fri, Oct 10

Lab 7 Test Doubles

Mon, Oct 13

No Class, Fall Break

Wed, Oct 15

No Class, Fall Break

Fri, Oct 17

No Lab, Fall Break

Mon, Oct 20

Concurrency and Hazards

Wed, Oct 22

HW 4 due Design and Testability Refactoring

Wed, Oct 22

Java Parallelism

Fri, Oct 24

Lab 8 Java Parallelism

Mon, Oct 27

Concurrency and Asynchrony in TypeScript

Wed, Oct 29

HW 2c due Santorini: Final design

Wed, Oct 29

Concurrency and Patterns

Fri, Oct 31

Lab 9 Concurrency and Promises

Mon, Nov 3

GUIs

Wed, Nov 5

Midterm 2

Fri, Nov 7

Lab 10 ReactJS/Intro to GUIs

Mon, Nov 10

Libraries and Frameworks

Wed, Nov 12

HW 5 due Concurrency

Wed, Nov 12

API Design

Fri, Nov 14

Lab 11 TicTacToe Client/Server

Mon, Nov 17

API Design II

Wed, Nov 19

HW 6a due Santorini: User Interface

Wed, Nov 19

Supply Chain Security

Fri, Nov 21

Lab 12 APIs

Mon, Nov 24

Distributed Systems: Designing for Robustness

Wed, Nov 26

No Class, Thanksgiving Break

Fri, Nov 28

No Lab, Thanksgiving Break

Mon, Dec 1

DevOps

Wed, Dec 3

HW 6b due Santorini: God Cards

Wed, Dec 3

The Last One: Looking Back & Looking Forward

Fri, Dec 5

Lab 13 Design Pattern Review

Fri, Dec 12
1:00-4:00pm

Final ExamLocation TBD

Staff

Instructor: Hammad Ahmad [hammada]

TAs:

- Bruce (Yikang) Cheng [yikangc]
- Jing Jin [jjin2]
- Matthew Wong [chunkitw]
- Yuqi Zhou [yuqizou]

Course Syllabus and Policies

Prerequisites

- 15-122 or 15-211, or equivalent with instructor's permission

- The equivalent of 2 semester-long programming classes

  - Ability to write small programs in Java (or C, C#, or other
    imperative languages with pointers or references)
  - Ability to reason about programs using preconditions,
    postconditions, and invariants
  - Familiarity with a basic set of algorithms and data structures
    (linked lists, simple graph and sorting algorithms)

- 15-151 or 21-127, or equivalent with instructor's permission

  - Sound foundation of mathematical concepts; ability to reason
    formally

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Grading and Deadlines

Evaluation will be based on the following percentages:

- 50% assignments (1000 total points, each assignment has a different
  weighting)
- 30% exams (7.5% for each of 2 midterm exams and 15% for the final)
- 10% labs
- 10% participation and quizzes

This course does not have a fixed letter grade policy; i.e., the final
letter grades will not be A=90-100%, B=80-90%, etc.

Homework grading and regrading. We try to be transparent in our rubrics
in our assignments. Feel free to ask instructor or TAs clarification
questions about the rubrics before the assignment is due. If you
disagree with a grade, please submit a regrade request within 7 days on
Gradescope. Regrade requests need a justification, explaining why our
assessment is inconsistent with the rubric. Regrade requests without
such justification will be closed.

Each student can resubmit any one assignment milestone (except HWs 2a,
2b, and 6b) and it will be regraded as if it was the first submission
(see below).

Participation and quizzes. You should expect a quiz at the start of
nearly every lecture and often additional in-class activities within the
lecture. When a reading assignment is given, the quiz will typically
touch on the content from the reading material. Otherwise (and sometimes
in addition), the quiz centers around the content from the most recent
lecture or two. A quiz will typically have 1-2 questions and is graded
pass/fail.

Labs. Labs will be graded on a pass/no pass basis during recitations.
You will have a chance during recitation to improve your solution. See a
description here.

Late work. We understand that normal life events, including projects and
exams in other courses and technical difficulties out of your control,
can interfere with your ability to complete your work on time or attend
lectures and recitations. Our philosophy is that our late work policy
includes built-in flexibility but that the policy will be uniformly
applied to all students in all circumstances. Exceptions to this policy
will be made only with explicit accommodations, almost always involving
a family or medical emergency with your academic advisor or the Dean of
Student Affairs requesting the exception on your behalf.

We provide the following flexibility, no questions asked, no
justification needed:

- For quizzes, we will drop up to two missed/failed solutions during the
  semester.
- For labs, we will drop up to two missed/failed solutions during the
  semester.
- For homework deadlines, you have 5 free late days for the semester.
  You can exceed each deadline by up to three days, for a penalty of 10%
  per day once you run out of free late days. This policy applies to all
  homework deadlines except HWs 2a, 2b, and 6b.
- For a single homework deadline during the semester (except HWs 2a, 2b,
  and 6b), you can redo and resubmit your work after it was graded. It
  will be regraded as if it was the first submission and you can regain
  all lost points. Each student can only do this once. We accept
  resubmissions until December 5 at 11:59pm. (While we do not recommend
  it, you can use this as arbitrary late days for a single deadline,
  receiving 0 points for missing the initial deadline and then
  resubmitting later.)

Any work submitted beyond the flexibility provided by these mechanisms
will receive feedback but no credit unless explicit accommodations were
provided.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Attendance and remote participation

This course, including recitations, is marked by the registrar as IPE
("delivered in-person, students are expected to be in the classroom
during the course's scheduled meeting time"). We do not plan to make
accommodations for remote attendance.

We strongly recommend attending lectures. We have regular in-class
activities and quizzes that we expect you to complete in class.
Attending recitations is required for grading labs.

Research shows that using devices on non-class related activities harms
both the device user's learning, and other students' learning as well.
Therefore, in general, we do not allow the use of devices during
lecture. If you genuinely use your laptop for class-related activities
(note-taking, etc), tell us, and we will make an exception. However, we
ask that if you do so, you are careful to keep your devices in
note-taking mode (and don’t stray to Facebook, homework, etc). In
addition, you will be asked to sit in the back row of the lecture to
minimize the impact your screen has on others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Textbooks

This course will occasionally assign readings, from the two text books
below. The CMU library has both physical and electronic copies of these
books. You can access all of these books for free electronically through
the CMU library.

- Larman, Craig. Applying UML and Patterns: An Introduction to
  Object-Oriented Analysis and Design and Iterative Development, 3rd
  Edition. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-148906-2. [CMU Library] This book
  describes basics of object-oriented design, responsibility assignment,
  and some design patterns used in the course. We will use the third
  edition, which covers the course's topics in more details than earlier
  editions. We will assign select chapters.
- Bloch, Joshua. Effective Java, Third Edition. Addison-Wesley, ISBN
  978-0-13-468599-1. [CMU Library] This book covers many aspects of
  program design, not only those specific to Java. We will assign
  multiple chapters.

In addition, we list several optional readings that may be helpful with
specific topics in the course. Especially if Java/Javascript is new to
you, you might want to consider exploring additional books.

- Object-Oriented Design and Design Patterns

  - Alan Shalloway and James Trott. Design Patterns Explained: A New
    Perspective on Object-Oriented Design (2nd Ed.) [CMU Library]
  - Gamma et al. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented
    Software. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-201-63361-2 [CMU Library] (this is
    an excellent book, but more of a reference text than the Design
    Patterns Explained book. In addition, because it was the original
    patterns book, the examples are in C++ and Smalltalk, not Java)

- Java

  - Note: Here are some popular textbook and online resources for
    learning Java.
  - Sestoft. Java Precisely. MIT Press, 2016. [2nd edition in the CMU
    library] (this is a very concise reference with many good examples;
    it assumes that you already know other programming languages)
  - Introduction to Programming Using Java (free online textbook)
  - Blue Pelican Java (free online textbook)

- Javascript/Typescript

  - Douglas Crockford. JavaScript: The good parts. O'Reilly, 2008. [CMU
    library]
  - Boris Cherny. Programming Typescript: Making Your JavaScript
    Applications Scale. O'Reilly, 2019. [CMU library]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Time management

This is a 12-unit course, and it is our intention to manage it so that
you spend close to 12 hours a week on the course, on average. In
general, 4 hours/week will be spent in class, 1 hour on labs, and 7
hours on assignments. Please feel free to give the course staff feedback
on how much time the course is taking for you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Research to Improve the Course

For this class, we are conducting research on teaching and learning.
This research will involve some student work. You will not be asked to
do anything above and beyond the normal learning activities and
assignments that are part of this course. You are free not to
participate in this research, and your participation will have no
influence on your grade for this course or your academic career at CMU.
If you do not wish to participate, please send an email to Chad Hershock
(hershock@andrew.cmu.edu). Participants will not receive any
compensation. The data collected as part of this research will include
student grades. All analyses of data from participants’ coursework will
be conducted after the course is over and final grades are submitted.
The Eberly Center may provide support on this research project regarding
data analysis and interpretation. The Eberly Center for Teaching
Excellence & Educational Innovation is located on the CMU-Pittsburgh
Campus and its mission is to support the professional development of all
CMU instructors regarding teaching and learning. To minimize the risk of
breach of confidentiality, the Eberly Center will never have access to
data from this course containing your personal identifiers. All data
will be analyzed in de-identified form and presented in the aggregate,
without any personal identifiers. If you have questions pertaining to
your rights as a research participant, or to report concerns to this
study, please contact Chad Hershock (hershock@andrew.cmu.edu).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Collaboration policy and academic integrity

The usual policies apply, especially the University Policy on Academic
Integrity. We expect that your work on assignments, projects, and exams
will be your own work. The key guiding principle of academic honesty in
this course is: "You may not copy any part of a solution to a problem
that was written by another student (in this or prior iterations of the
class), or was developed together with another student, or was delegated
to another person. You may not look at another student's solution, even
if you have completed your own, nor may you knowingly give your solution
to another student or leave your solution where another student can see
it." Note that this implies that you cannot publicly post your solutions
on GitHub (e.g., as part of a portfolio during job applications). We
also expect and respect honesty when communicating with the course
staff.

Any violation of this policy is cheating. We use automated systems to
detect software plagiarism. These automated systems are highly effective
and, so far, have detected software plagiarism almost every semester.
The minimum penalty for cheating will be a zero grade for the whole
assignment. Cheating incidents will also be reported through University
channels, with possible additional disciplinary action (see the
University Policy on Academic Integrity).

For labs and homeworks you are allowed to use various tools and help
available to professional programmers, such as online documentation,
online tutorials and support forums like Stackoverflow, and AI
assistants like Copilot and ChatGPT. You are allowed to post technical
questions about aspects of the homework elsewhere, as long as you do not
ask other humans to complete the work for you. Whenever you use external
resources like this, you are still fully responsible for the correctness
of your solution and complying with licenses. Note that content
generation tools often create plausible-looking but incorrect answers,
which will not receive credit.

When you use AI assistants in homework, some assignments may require you
to briefly describe their use and your experience with the homework
submission.

Here are some examples of behavior that are inappropriate:

- Copying (or retyping) files, parts of files (such as source code,
  written text, or unit tests), quiz solutions, or exam solutions from
  another person or source, either in draft or final form, even if the
  file permissions are incorrectly set to allow it. This behavior is
  still clearly inappropriate even if you make modifications (such as
  style changes or minor logic modifications) from the original source.
- Searching for or viewing a current or past student's homework
  solution.
- Allowing someone else to view or copy your code, written assignment,
  quiz, or exam, either in draft or final form.
- Writing, using, or submitting a program that attempts to alter or
  erase grading information or otherwise compromise security of course
  resources.
- Lying to course staff.
- Making your work publicly available in a way that other students
  (current or future) can access your solutions, even if others’ access
  is accidental or incidental to your goals.

Here are some examples of acceptable behaviors:

- Solve technical problems by searching for the error message with
  Google or on StackOverflow.
- Copying code snippets from tutorials or StackOverflow into your own
  code.
- Importing libraries as part of your implementation. Reading
  documentation and examples of libraries. Copying libraries or utility
  files into your repository (bad practice to avoid, but not consider
  cheating).
- Copying code from labs or reference solutions provided in recitations.
- Using GitHub Copilot while writing your solution.
- Using ChatGPT to write or help write justifications in homework
  assignments, while checking the correctness of the answer.
- Looking at other students' solutions when explicitly instructed by the
  course staff, for example, as part of peer grading for labs, quizzes,
  or homework.

There is no statute of limitations for violations of the collaboration
policy; penalties may be assessed (and referred to the university
disciplinary board) after you have completed the course, and some
requirements of the collaboration policy (such as restrictions on you
posting your solutions) extend beyond your completion of the course.

If you have any question about how this policy applies in a particular
situation, ask the instructor or TAs for clarification.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Audit Policy

If you desire to audit the course, our general requirement is that you
complete homeworks to achieve at least 50% of the total homework grade.
Solutions do not need to be fully complete, but we encourage you to
attempt to do so. We additionally encourage you to attend lectures and
complete labs, but you are not required to do so. You should not attend
our midterm exams or final exam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Your health matters

When we say "your health matters" we mean exactly that: Your health
matters. We don't intend to imply that other peoples' health does not
matter, or that your health matters more or less than theirs. We know
that CMU can be a stressful, risky environment, and your health is the
health that is relevant in this conversation. Worries about Covid-19 and
possible remote classes do not help.

Please take care of yourself. Do your best to maintain a healthy
lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.

All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not
alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an
important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.

If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult
life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly
encourage you to seek support. Counseling and Psychological Services
(CaPS) is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and visit their website at
http://www.cmu.edu/counseling/. Consider reaching out to a friend,
faculty or family member you trust for help getting connected to the
support that can help.

If you are worried about affording food or feeling insecure about food,
there are resources on campus who can help. Email the CMU Food Pantry
Coordinator to schedule an appointment: cmu-pantry@andrew.cmu.edu

Respect for diversity. It is our intent that students from all diverse
backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed both in and out of class, and that
the diversity that students bring to this class be viewed as a resource,
strength and benefit. It is my intent to present materials and
activities that are respectful of diversity: gender, sexuality,
disability, age, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, race, and culture.
Your suggestions are encouraged and appreciated. Please let us know ways
to improve the effectiveness of the course for you personally or for
other students or student groups.

Accommodations for students with disabilities. If you have a disability
and have an accommodations letter from the Disability Resources office,
we encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs with us as
early in the semester as possible. We will work with you to ensure that
accommodations are provided as appropriate. If you suspect that you may
have a disability and would benefit from accommodations but are not yet
registered with the Office of Disability Resources, we encourage you to
contact them at access@andrew.cmu.edu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Informal feedback on this course

We are planning many changes to this course in this semester and not
everything will work out smoothly the first time. We’d like you to
provide ongoing feedback on your experience in the course, so that we
can take into account your experience and adapt our practices to make
the course work for you.

Outside of the regular course meetings and Piazza, you can submit
feedback about anything in the course per email to the instructor or ask
TAs to forward them anonymously. We will read every message submitted
and use your feedback to try to improve the way we are teaching.
