HW3: Explore an API

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI

← Back to Course Overview Requirements Instructions Tips

Due Date: Sat. 2/7 at 8:00 PM
Time Estimate: 2–3 hours
Deliverables: Code, README, and key prompts uploaded to GitHub + brief
form response

UPDATE: The Google submission form will now require you to submit a
brief video showing what you've made. This will help us to grade your
work if we can't easily run it ourselves.

Assignment Overview

Goal: Use AI tools to explore and integrate a public API of your choice
into a small but interesting app, or you may add an API-related feature
on your portfolio website. The goal is hands-on experience with how APIs
work, how to call them from code, and how to read and discuss the
resulting code.

Why This Matters: APIs are how many external data sources and services
are accessed. This assignment teaches you to find a suitable API, design
a small integration, and use AI to help implement and understand the
code.

Examples of APIs you might use: weather, stock prices, random quotes,
public transport schedules, open datasets, and other public endpoints.

Requirements & Scoring

What You Must Submit

- GitHub repository: Place the following items in either a new Github
  repo or (if adding a feature to your website) update the repo for your
  website to include the code and necessary information.
  1.  Code: A python script, game, small web app, or an added feature to
      your portfolio website that fetches data from the chosen API and
      does something interesting or interactive with it. We recommend
      making a python app, but you may use javascript or another
      language if you wish. (Information can be displayed as console
      output, simple app or HTML page, or embedded widget on your
      website).
  2.  README: In the repo README, include 3–5 sentences that explain (at
      a high level) how the API is called (for example, what modules are
      used if any, what key parameters are provided, and what format /
      data types are returned). If your code requires an API key or
      other authentication, provide information on how to obtain an and
      use that API key (WITHOUT exposing the key itself in the repo).
  3.  Prompt log: A short note (in README or a separate file like
      PROMPT_HISTORY.txt) listing which AI model(s)/tool(s) you used and
      the key prompts that shaped the implementation (not the
      necessarily the entire chat dump, just the prompts you found most
      important).
- Portfolio: Add your project to your portfolio. (Note: If you have a
  good reason to not want your submission on your portfolio, email Mike
  before the deadline, but we hope you will make something cool.)
- NEW VIDEO REQUIREMENT: Make a short video that shows what you've
  created. This can be very short, but it should contain enough
  information for us to grade your work if we can't easily run it
  ourselves. You should submit a link to this video (either a Youtube
  link or a Google Drive link, with permissions set so that anyone with
  the link can view it) to the form below. Note: We aren't looking for
  top production quality here (though of course if you're proud of your
  video, you might find it useful for your portfolio).
- Google form: Fill out this google form, which asks for some basic
  information on how to find your project, along with a link to your
  video (make sure we can view it by testing your Youtube or Google
  Drive link in an incognito window). Be sure to fill this out by the
  due date!

Privacy note: Do not commit API keys, credentials, or other secrets to
GitHub. If the API requires a key, use environment variables or a local
text file or config file excluded via .gitignore, and explain in the
README how to provide the key locally. See the Tips section below for
advice on how to set up a .gitignore file. Security is important, and
you will receive a zero if your repository contains a private key that
should not be exposed. (Ask on Ed if you aren't sure if something is a
private key or not!)

Grading

Prioritize a thoughtful implementation that does something interesting
and more complex than just getting and printing data, and make your
supporting documents clear and explanatory. The assignment is
intentionally open-ended.

- For full points (100/100) we're looking to see evidence of about 2.5
  to 3 hours of thoughtful and exploratory effort, with the requisite
  components listed above. We'll expect some interactivity and
  creativity here.
- For a passing C grade (70/100) we would expect a simple script that
  makes an API call and displays the information in a simple,
  non-interactive way.
- On Wednesday 2/4 we'll create a small app in class, and we'll let you
  know what grade this would receive as an additional gauge for your
  progress.

As with Crossy Road, by default we will expect that you'll post the
result on your portfolio, though you may request to be exempt from this
requirement if you email Mike with a good reason before the deadline. Be
creative! You may wish to use this as a start to a larger project.
Regardless, first focus on a working, clean implementation of the API
and then wrap an experience around it.

Detailed Instructions

1.  Choose a public API you find interesting (preferably free or with a
    free tier).
2.  Decide on a small scope: fetch and display current data (e.g.,
    current weather for a city), or fetch and show a list (e.g., latest
    quotes), or perhaps a plot (e.g. for stock data or recent
    temperatures), or add a small dynamic widget to your portfolio. You
    should choose something that can do more than just return the same
    data every time, e.g. you should fetch recent data, or you should
    allow the user to specify some parameters for the information they
    wish to retrieve.
3.  Use AI tools to help learn how the API works and to generate some
    code. As always, be explicit in your prompts so that you get results
    that align with your goals.
4.  Implement the code and test it locally. Remember, keep API keys and
    other secrets out of the repo — use environment variables or a local
    text file or config file excluded from version control. See below
    for instructions on setting up a .gitignore if needed. (This is only
    relevant if your API requires authentication or a secret key.)
5.  Write a short README and prompt log as described above and include
    these in your repo.
6.  Push your code to a public GitHub repo.
7.  Make your video and upload it, and fill out the Google submission
    form before the deadline

What is an API?

An API (Application Programming Interface) is a set of rules that lets
programs talk to each other. Many web APIs provide data over the network
via HTTP requests. You may also find and use Python modules that provide
helper functions for specific APIs.Below are a few short definitions you
may find useful as you work on this assignment.

- Endpoint: A specific URL you request to get or send data (for example,
  /weather).
- Request: The HTTP call your code makes (includes method like GET/POST,
  headers, and parameters).
- Response: The data the API returns (often JSON) and an HTTP status
  code.
- JSON: A common text format for API responses (JavaScript Object
  Notation). The JSON format looks a little like a nested dictionary,
  with keys and values.
- Authentication / API key: A secret token (e.g. a string of letters and
  numbers) some APIs require to identify you. Never commit keys to a
  public repo.
- Rate limit: A limit on how many requests you can make in a time
  period.
- Query parameter: Extra data appended to a URL to modify the request
  (for example, ?city=Pittsburgh).
- REST: A common API style that uses HTTP verbs and endpoints to operate
  on resources.
- Wrappers: Helper functions and classes that implement the HTTP
  requests behind the scenes, and allow you to use the APIs more easily.
  These can be very convenient!

When you use AI to generate API code, ask the model to show sample
requests and explain each field in the response so you can verify you
understand how the API works.

Tips

- Start small: Fetch one endpoint and display a few fields; you can
  extend if time allows.
- Check rate limits: Use APIs with reasonable limits for development or
  use sample/demo keys if provided. Also, make sure your code does not
  make more calls than it needs to! For example, if you have a loop in
  Python that constantly calls the API, you can hit your rate limit
  almost instantly. Or, for paid APIs, you might accidentally rack up a
  very large bill... for this reason, we strongly recommend not using
  APIs that you have to pay for in this assignment.
- Hide keys: Put keys in environment variables or a file named
  config.local (and add it to .gitignore). In README show how to set the
  env var. See GitHub's guide on ignoring files:
  https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/getting-started-with-git/ignoring-files
- Find cool APIs here: See these curated lists of public APIs and Python
  wrappers:
  - https://github.com/realpython/list-of-python-api-wrappers
  - https://github.com/public-apis/public-apis
- Ask AI to explain: After getting code from an AI model, ask it to
  annotate or explain each function or request so you can demonstrate
  understanding.
- Use the documentation: APIs typically have extensive documentation
  online. This documentation can be dense, but we strongly recommend you
  read the basics, even if AI seems to be giving you something that
  "just works." Also, many API docs include sample requests. Use them as
  a starting point when prompting the model.
- You may wish to use some supporting modules and libraries (like pygame
  or matplotlib if you're making your submission in python). This is
  a-ok! Note that pygame and matplotlib and most other modules are not
  APIs, but they can be helpful in adding visualization and
  interactivity to your app. Ask us if you need help finding resources
  and documentation for these modules.

Questions? Ask on Ed, attend office hours, or email the instructor.
Consult the course AI usage and collaboration policies on the course
homepage.

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI | Spring 2026

Carnegie Mellon University | School of Computer Science
