HW4: Backend + Frontend

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI

← Back to Course Overview Requirements Instructions Tips

Due Date: Sat. 2/14 at 8:00 PM
Time Estimate: ~3 hours
Deliverables: Backend code on Render + frontend code on GitHub + brief
form response

Assignment Overview

Goal: Build a simple backend service on Render.com and integrate it with
your portfolio website or a GitHub Pages site. This assignment teaches
you how to build server-side code that handles operations that are
better done on the backend (like using APIs securely, storing data, or
processing user input).

Why This Matters: Many features are best implemented on the backend
because: (1) you can keep API keys and secrets secure, (2) you can
process and store data safely, (3) you can do computationally intensive
work, and (4) you can validate user input before using it. This
assignment teaches you to identify when a backend is useful and how to
build one quickly using AI.

Examples of what you might build:

- A chatbot on your website that talks to an AI (e.g., a character
  version of yourself or a famous person) using OpenAI or Claude API
- A form that saves data to a database
- A page that fetches data from an API that requires authentication
- A tool that processes user input in some way (e.g., translates text,
  generates images, analyzes sentiment)

See the course website for an example: check out this Carnegie Chat
example, which uses a Python backend on Render to power an AI chatbot.

Tutorial: Watch this first!

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

This video walks through the steps for getting an example up and running
on Render. We strongly recommend you watch this first so that you can
see what steps you should take, and so that you can get some inspiration
for how to prompt for what you need. Your code will be different, so
focus on capturing the main ideas, and refer back to HW3 for help with
APIs.

Requirements & Scoring

What You Must Submit

- Backend code deployment: A public Render deployment link to your
  running backend service. (Note: If you wish to use a different service
  like Vercel, that's ok too, though we will be best equipped to help
  you with Render.)
- Backend code on GitHub: A new public repository containing your
  backend code (Python using Flask or FastAPI is recommended) along with
  your readme and prompt log described below. Note that this repository
  is different from the repository you will use for your frontent.
  - README: In your backend repo, add a README that briefly explains:
    - What your backend does (what endpoints it has, what parameters it
      accepts, what it returns)
    - How the frontend communicates with the backend (which endpoints it
      calls, when, and what it does with the response)
    - How to set up and run the backend (including any environment
      variables or API keys needed locally)
    - How authentication or secrets are handled (e.g., API keys stored
      on the backend, not in frontend code)
  - Prompt log: In your backend repo, add a short note (in README or
    PROMPT_HISTORY.txt) listing which AI model(s)/tool(s) you used and
    the key prompts that shaped implementation.
- Frontend code deployed and on GitHub: Add your frontend code to Github
  pages (either as a new feature on your portfolio or as a separate
  page, like the Carnegie Chat example). This is the HTML/CSS/JavaScript
  that communicates with your backend.
- Portfolio: If your work is not a feature on your portfolio (i.e. if
  it's not already directly integrated into your portfolio somehow) add
  a link to it in your projects section.
- Short Video: Make a short video that shows what you've created and how
  it works (screenshare of the frontend interacting with the backend is
  fine). This can be brief, but should contain enough information for us
  to grade your work if we can't run it ourselves. Submit a link to the
  video (YouTube or Google Drive with view permissions) below.
- Google form: Fill this out with some key information, like the public
  URL for your frontend (which might just be a link to your portfolio),
  the repository URL for your backend, the repository URL for your
  frontend, and the link to your video. Be sure to fill this out before
  the deadline.

Privacy and Security: Once again, do not commit API keys, credentials,
or secrets to GitHub. Keep all secrets on the Render backend using
environment variables or an uploaded secret file that is not in your
repository. We will not accept submissions that expose private keys
publicly. Watch the tutorial video for information on how to do this.

Grading

You'll receive full credit for submitting a working backend-frontend
integration with clear documentation and clean communication: Your
frontend should make requests to your backend and display the results or
confirm that the request was handled successfully. It should handle
errors gracefully. Focus on core functionality and clean communication
between frontend and backend rather than UI polish.

Detailed Instructions

1.  Choose what your backend will do. Decide on something interesting
    that requires server-side logic: handle authentication, process
    data, call a third-party API securely, store information, etc.

Focus on functionality: For this assignment, prioritize getting the
backend and frontend working together over adding lots of features and
polishing the UI or user experience. Don't spend much time on design
details. Later in the course (Project 2), we'll bring together your
knowledge of frontends, APIs, and backends into one really polished
project. For that and any future work, you can either build on earlier
assignments in this class or start fresh with an entirely new idea, as
long as your work meets the assignment specifications.

2.  Write your backend. We recommend using Python with Flask, but you
    may also use FastAPI or another backend framework, or you may use a
    different language altogether. Use AI tools to help you write the
    code. Make sure your backend:
    - Has at least one endpoint that accepts data and returns a
      meaningful response
    - Handles any API keys or secrets using environment variables or a
      secret file that is not present on your repo or your frontend
    - Returns JSON or another structured format that your frontend can
      use
3.  Deploy your backend to Render. Create a free account at render.com,
    create a new Web Service, connect your GitHub repo, and deploy.
    Render will give you a public URL (e.g.,
    https://my-backend.onrender.com).
4.  Write your frontend. Create an HTML/CSS/JavaScript page (on your
    portfolio or a new repo) that:
    - Makes requests to your backend using fetch() or another HTTP
      client
    - Displays the responses nicely (or provides confirmation that the
      request was handled)
    - Handles errors (e.g., if the backend is down or the user provides
      bad input)
5.  Test end-to-end. Make sure your frontend can call your backend and
    display real results. Test error cases too (e.g., what happens if
    the user submits an empty form).
6.  Document everything. Write a clear README explaining what your
    backend does, how to run it locally, how the frontend calls it, and
    where secrets are stored.
7.  Push both repos to GitHub (backend + frontend) and fill out the
    Google form with your Render URL and GitHub repos before the
    deadline.
8.  Make your video and upload it, and fill out the google form before
    the deadline.

What is a Backend? Key Concepts

A backend is a program running on a server that your frontend (website)
can communicate with. Here are some key ideas:

- Server: A computer or service that runs your code and is always
  available to respond to requests.
- Endpoint: A specific URL on your backend that does something (e.g.,
  https://my-backend.onrender.com/chat).
- Request: Your frontend asks the backend to do something by sending
  data (usually as JSON).
- Response: The backend processes the request and sends back a result
  (usually as JSON).
- Environment variables: Settings stored on the server (like API keys)
  that your code can read but aren't in the code itself.
- Framework: A library that makes it easy to write a backend (Flask,
  FastAPI, Django, etc.).
- Render: A service that hosts your backend for free (or cheap) and
  handles all the server stuff for you.
- CORS: A security rule that controls which websites can talk to your
  backend. You may need to ask AI to enable CORS for your frontend to
  communicate with your backend.

When you use AI to write your backend, ask it to explain what each
endpoint does and how to test it locally.

Tips

- Start simple: Begin with a single endpoint that does one thing well.
  You can add more endpoints later if you have time.
- Test locally first: Before deploying to Render, test your backend on
  your laptop. Make sure it works before you push it live.
  - Run the server locally (for example, run your backend Python file
    and you should see an IP address show up.) While it is running
    locally, you should be able to substitute this IP address for your
    endpoint in your frontend .html code, and if you open your frontend
    in the browser, you should be able to interact with the service. You
    can also use curl as shown farther below to send very specific
    requests to your endpoint.
- Use environment variables: Store API keys, database URLs, and secrets
  as environment variables or in a secret file on Render. Never put them
  in your code. See the Render docs for how to set these.
- Handle errors gracefully: Your backend should return helpful error
  messages (not just crash). Your frontend should display these errors
  to the user.
- Remember CORS: If your frontend is on GitHub Pages
  (https://username.github.io) and your backend is on Render, you may
  need to enable CORS on the backend so the browser allows the requests.
  Most backend frameworks have easy middleware for this.
- Use the documentation: Render, Flask, and FastAPI all have good
  documentation. Read the basics so you understand what your
  AI-generated code is doing.
- Ask AI to explain: After getting code from an AI model, ask it to
  explain what each function and endpoint does so you can demonstrate
  understanding and debug if needed.
- Remember, Ed and OH are here to help! Even if we don't know the answer
  to your question right away, we can probably point you in a good
  direction.

Getting Started with Render

- Sign up for free at https://render.com
- Read Render's quickstart for Python:
  https://docs.render.com/deploy-python
- Render has a free tier; use it for this assignment. (Note: free
  services may take a moment to start up if idle, but that's fine for
  learning.)

Backend Framework Resources

- Flask: Simple and beginner-friendly. See
  https://flask.palletsprojects.com/
- FastAPI: More modern, faster, and great for JSON APIs. See
  https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/

Frontend-Backend Communication

- Use fetch() in JavaScript to call your backend. Example:
  fetch('https://my-backend.onrender.com/chat', { method: 'POST', body: JSON.stringify({message: "Hello"}) })
- Test requests locally using curl:
  curl -X POST https://my-backend.onrender.com/chat -d '{"message":"Hello"}' -H "Content-Type: application/json"

Questions? Ask on Ed, attend office hours, or email the instructor.
Consult the course AI usage and collaboration policies on the course
homepage.

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI | Spring 2026

Carnegie Mellon University | School of Computer Science
