HW6: Build a Database App

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI

← Back to Course Overview Requirements Instructions Key Concepts Tips

Due Date: Sat. 3/14 at 8:00 PM
Time Estimate: ~3 hours
Deliverables: Code + README + prompt log on GitHub, brief form
response + video

Assignment Overview

Goal: Build a small app that uses a SQLite database to store, retrieve,
update, and delete data. You'll choose something personally interesting
to track and build a working app around it using Python and AI tools.

Why This Matters: Almost every real-world application stores data in a
database. Understanding how to create tables, insert records, query
data, and modify entries is a foundational skill. In this assignment
you'll learn to use SQL (Structured Query Language) to manage persistent
data, and you'll see how AI tools can help you learn a new technology
quickly.

Examples of what you might build:

- A reading log
- A to-do list
- A workout journal
- A recipe collection
- A budget tracker
- A course planner
- Or essentially anything else that interests you

Build on prior work if you want! This assignment is designed as a fresh,
standalone project that runs locally on your machine (and this will
probably be the easiest path). However, if you'd prefer to add or
improve database functionality to an existing project, that's perfectly
fine—as long as your submission meets all the requirements below and as
long as your git commits show your efforts this week.

Requirements & Scoring

Core Requirements (your app must do all of these)

Your app must use a SQLite database with at least one table containing
at least 4 columns (including an id column). Your app must support all
four CRUD operations:

  Operation   What It Means                       Example
  ----------- ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  Create      Add a new record to the database    Add a new book to my reading log
  Read        Retrieve and display records        Show all books I've read this year
  Update      Modify an existing record           Change a book's rating from 3 to 4 stars
  Delete      Remove a record from the database   Remove a book I added by mistake

Your Read functionality must include at least one query that filters or
sorts the data based on user input (e.g., "show only 5-star books" or
"show entries sorted by date").

Interface

Your app needs some kind of interactive user interface. You have three
options, in order from simplest to most ambitious:

1.  Command-line interface (CLI): A terminal-based menu where the user
    types choices and sees text output. This is the simplest option and
    (because this assignment is focusing on database functionality) this
    is perfectly sufficient for full credit.
2.  Simple web interface: A Flask app with HTML pages for viewing and
    managing data (similar to HW4). This gives you more practice with
    web development.
3.  Graphical interface: A desktop app using a library like tkinter or
    PyQt. Only attempt this if you're comfortable or curious.

Strongly recommended: Start with a CLI. It'll be fastest and easiest to
get your database logic working and tested if you aren't simultaneously
debugging a complex UI. If you finish early and want to add a web or
graphical interface, go for it, but get the core database operations
working first.
Also, if you get the database and CLI working and you unsuccessfully
attempt a graphical interface, you should revert your code (and any
edits to your README) to a working CLI version before the deadline so
that you can still get full credit. Your README should let us know how
to run and/or access a working version of your app.

What You Must Submit

- GitHub repository containing:
  1.  Code: Your Python application (and any HTML/CSS/JS etc. if you
      built a web interface). The app should be runnable with clear
      instructions.
  2.  README: Must be named README.md and located at the repository root
      (or inside the project folder if you placed the project in your
      portfolio repo). Include the following:
      - What your app tracks and why you chose it (1–2 sentences)
      - Your database schema: what table(s) you created, what columns
        they have, and the data types (a simple table or list is fine)
      - How to run your app (what to install, what command(s) to use)
      - A brief description of each CRUD operation and how a user
        performs it
  3.  Prompt log — titled prompt_log.txt or prompt_log.md, and located
      in the same folder as your README. It must list which AI
      model(s)/tools you used, document the development process from
      start to finish, and include important, non-trivial prompts (not
      just summaries). As a whole, this file should make it obvious that
      you invested roughly 3 hours of work.
- Portfolio: Add a link to your project repository to your portfolio
  with a brief description.
- Short video: A short screen-recorded video that shows your app
  performing each CRUD operation and explains your technical/design
  choices; upload to YouTube/Drive and include the link in the Google
  form (and make sure anyone with the link can access it). This is a
  primary tool for us when grading your work, though it's also a good
  way to show off on your portfolio.
- Google form: Fill out this form with your repo link, video link, and
  basic info.

Grading

  Grade        (Roughly) What We're Looking For
  ------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  A (90-100)   All four CRUD operations work correctly. At least one filtered/sorted query. Clean, understandable code. Thoughtful README and prompt log. Evidence of ~3 hours of effort. Some creativity in what you chose to track or how you display it.
  B (80-89)    All four CRUD operations work. README and prompt log present but less detailed. Functional but straightforward.
  C (70-79)    At least Create and Read work. Some attempt at Update or Delete. Basic README.
  Below C      Incomplete or non-functional submission.

Note: We've seen a few prevalent shortcuts taken in previous assignments
that seem to be backfiring on people, either by producing substandard
results or circumventing your learning goals. To that end, please avoid
the following, and note that we may assess deductions for these:

- Do not try to build this app in a single prompt, and do not
  immediately provide this document to the AI as context. The latter may
  seem counterintuitive, but we have noticed a lack of prompt
  sophistication due to overreliance on the specifications we've already
  given you. We want you to practice understanding and specifying the
  requirements yourselves, because the work you do in the future will
  not be as precisely described. Implemend CRUD step-by-step, and debug
  as you go. This will also help you reach a better outcome (and a
  better understanding of your project) in less time.
- Likewise, don't completely rely on AI for your README and prompt_log.
  While we won't strictly prohibit you from using AI to create your
  README and prompt_log, we've recently seen some really nonsensical
  ones that were clearly AI-generated at an early stage in the project,
  and do not reflect the code that was actually given to us. Sometimes
  it also includes erroneous or unhelpful AI-generated text. You should
  read your own README and make sure it makes sense. A bad AI-generated
  README is a major red flag for employers who value reliability and
  precision.

Step-by-Step Instructions

We recommend working through these steps in order. Each step builds on
the previous one, and this order will help you make steady progress
rather than getting stuck debugging too many things at once. If you find
that one of these steps is taking significantly longer than the time we
specified here, or if you aren't confident on how to start, please ask
on Ed or come to office hours!

Step 1: Choose What to Track (15 minutes)

Pick something you'd genuinely find useful or fun to track. Here are
some ideas, but feel free to come up with your own:

- Reading log: title, author, genre, rating, date finished, notes
- Workout journal: exercise, duration, intensity, date, notes
- Recipe collection: name, cuisine, prep time, difficulty, ingredients,
  URL
- Budget tracker: item, amount, category, date, notes
- Music diary: song, artist, album, genre, rating, date listened
- Course planner: course name, department, units, semester, grade,
  status
- Movie/TV log: title, genre, rating, date watched, where you watched it
- Habit tracker: habit name, date, completed (yes/no), streak, notes

Once you've picked a topic, write down 4–6 pieces of information
(columns) you'd want to store for each entry. One of them should be an
id that uniquely identifies each record.

Step 2: Design Your Database Schema (15 minutes)

Before writing any code, sketch out your table on paper, in a notes app,
or by asking AI for help. For example, a reading log might look like:

    Table: books
    -----------------------------------------
    | id | title | author | rating | date_finished | notes |
    -----------------------------------------

Decide on the data type for each column. The most common SQLite types
are:

- INTEGER — whole numbers (good for id, rating, quantity)
- TEXT — strings (good for names, descriptions, dates as text)
- REAL — decimal numbers (good for prices, distances)

AI tip: Try prompting: "I want to create a SQLite database to track
[your topic]. Here are the columns I'm thinking of: [list them]. Can you
help me write a CREATE TABLE statement and suggest any columns I might
be missing?"

Step 3: Set Up Your Project and Create the Database (20 minutes)

Create a new folder and Python file for your project. Use Python's
built-in sqlite3 module (no installation needed!) to create your
database and table. Here's the general pattern:

    import sqlite3

    # Connect to (or create) a database file
    con = sqlite3.connect('my_tracker.db')
    cur = con.cursor()

    # Create your table (if it doesn't already exist)
    cur.execute('''
        CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS books (
            id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
            title TEXT NOT NULL,
            author TEXT,
            rating INTEGER,
            date_finished TEXT,
            notes TEXT
        )
    ''')
    con.commit()

Run your script and verify that the .db file is created. You can also
ask AI to show you how to verify the table was created correctly.

Step 4: Implement Create (INSERT) (20 minutes)

Write a function that takes user input and inserts a new record into
your table. For a CLI, this might look like asking the user for each
field and then running an INSERT INTO statement. Test it by adding a few
records.

AI tip: "Show me how to write a Python function that asks the user for
[your fields] and inserts a new row into my [table name] table using
sqlite3. Use parameterized queries to avoid SQL injection."

Step 5: Implement Read (SELECT) (20 minutes)

Write a function that retrieves records from your table and displays
them nicely. Start with showing all records, then add at least one way
to filter or sort. For example:

- Show all entries
- Show entries matching a search term (e.g., books by a specific author)
- Show entries sorted by a column (e.g., by rating, by date)
- Show entries matching a condition (e.g., only 5-star ratings, only
  this month)

Step 6: Implement Update (UPDATE) and Delete (DELETE) (30 minutes)

Update: Let the user pick a record (by id or by selecting from a list)
and change one or more of its fields. For example, updating a book's
rating after re-reading it.

Delete: Let the user remove a record by id. Consider asking for
confirmation before deleting ("Are you sure?").

Helpful pattern: For both Update and Delete, it's useful to first show
the user the record they're about to modify or delete, so they can
confirm they've selected the right one.

Step 7: Make the Interface (30 minutes)

If you're building a CLI (which we highly recommend), create a main menu
loop that lets the user choose between operations, something like this:

    --- My Reading Log ---
    1. Add a book
    2. View all books
    3. Search books
    4. Update a book
    5. Delete a book
    6. Quit

    Choose an option:

If you're building a web interface, make sure each operation has a
corresponding page or form.

Test the full flow: add several records, view them, update one, delete
one, and verify everything works.

Step 8: Write Your README and Prompt Log (15 minutes)

Document your work as described in the requirements above (see "What you
must submit").

Step 9: Record Your Video, Push to GitHub, Submit (15 minutes)

Make a short screencast (a minute or two is fine) showing yourself using
the app: add an entry, view entries, search/filter, update one, and
delete one. Push everything to GitHub, add it to your portfolio, and
fill out the Google submission form.

Key Concepts

Here's a quick reference for the SQL and database concepts you'll need.
We'll cover these in lecture, but this is here for you to refer back to.

- SQLite: A lightweight database that stores everything in a single file
  (like my_tracker.db). No server setup required—it's built right into
  Python.
- SQL (Structured Query Language): The language used to talk to
  databases. The four main operations are:
  - INSERT INTO table (columns) VALUES (values) — adds a new record
  - SELECT columns FROM table WHERE condition — retrieves records
  - UPDATE table SET column = value WHERE condition — modifies records
  - DELETE FROM table WHERE condition — removes records
- Schema: The structure of your database—what tables exist and what
  columns they have.
- Primary key: A unique identifier for each row (usually
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY).
- Parameterized queries: Using ? placeholders instead of string
  formatting to prevent SQL injection attacks. Example:
  cursor.execute("SELECT * FROM books WHERE author = ?", (author_name,))
- CRUD: Create, Read, Update, Delete—the four basic database operations.

Tips

- Start with the database, not the interface. Get your CREATE TABLE,
  INSERT, and SELECT working in a simple test script before building out
  a menu or web page. You can even test queries interactively in the
  Python REPL.
- Keep it simple first, then add flair if you wish. A clean, working CLI
  with all four CRUD operations is worth more than a fancy web interface
  that's only half-working. Get the basics solid before adding extra
  features.
- A warning for dates: SQLite has no native date type. Dates are stored
  as plain text. This can be ok as long as you're consistent about
  format. We strongly recommend storing all dates as YYYY-MM-DD (e.g.
  "2026-03-09"). This format sorts and compares correctly as text, so
  queries like WHERE date_finished > '2026-01-01' will behave as you'd
  expect. If you use a different format (e.g. "March 8, 2026"), date
  comparisons and sorting will silently produce wrong results.
- NULL surprises: If a column is optional (e.g. book_notes), some rows
  may have no value, stored as NULL. Be aware that
  WHERE notes != 'boring' will not return rows where notes is NULL,
  because any comparison with NULL yields NULL, not TRUE or FALSE. Use
  WHERE notes IS NULL or WHERE notes IS NOT NULL to check for missing
  values explicitly.
- Ask AI to explain the SQL. After AI generates a query for you, ask it
  to break down what each part does. Understanding your queries is
  required—you should be able to explain any SQL in your code.
- Use parameterized queries. Always use ? placeholders rather than
  f-strings or string concatenation when putting user input into SQL.
  This prevents SQL injection and avoids bugs with special characters.
  AI might sometimes generate code that uses f-strings in SQL—watch out
  for this and fix it.
- Don't forget conn.commit(). After INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE
  operations, you need to call conn.commit() to save changes to the
  database file. SELECT queries don't need a commit.
- Inspect your database. You can use a free tool like DB Browser for
  SQLite to open your .db file and see your tables and data visually.
  This is great for debugging.
- Close your connection. When your app exits, call conn.close() to
  cleanly close the database connection. (Note: There are ways to use
  Python's with statement for automatic cleanup, and you may see this in
  AI-generated code. If done correctly, this approach is fine too; just
  be consistent.)
- Add your .db file to .gitignore (unless you have a good reason not to,
  but be careful in this case). Your database file contains your
  personal test data and will be recreated when someone runs your app.
  Add *.db to your .gitignore so it isn't pushed to GitHub. (Include a
  note in your README about how the database is created on first run.)

AI tip: If you want an extra challenge, you might consider integrating
an AI-powered feature that generates the queries itself... for example,
instead of a CLI that has the user select from a fixed number of
options, the user types something like "Give me all of the books that
I've read in the last 3 months." That text gets sent to an AI with
information about your database schema and it returns a runnable query.
This is potentially much harder and more error-prone than you would
expect, though, so proceed with extreme caution, and/or wait until
Kian's lecture on Wednesday.

Useful Resources

- Python sqlite3 documentation — the official docs for Python's built-in
  SQLite module
- SQLite Tutorial — beginner-friendly SQL tutorial with examples
- DB Browser for SQLite — free visual tool for inspecting your database

Questions? Ask on Ed, or attend office hours!

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI | Spring 2026

Carnegie Mellon University | School of Computer Science
