HW8: The Agentic Build

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI

← Back to Course Overview What You'll Build Detailed Instructions
Deliverables Reflection Grading Tips

Due Date: Sun. 3/29 at 8:00 PM
Time Estimate: ~3 hours outside class
Deliverables: GitHub repo (link submitted through Google form), working
app, spec, review, reflection, portfolio entry

Assignment Overview

Goal: So far in 15-113, you've mostly used AI as a conversational
partner: you ask it to help you build something, it gives you code, you
copy/paste/modify, and repeat. In this assignment, you'll try a more
structured, agentic approach: instead of chatting back and forth, you'll
write a detailed plan first, hand it off to Copilot's Agent Mode (or
Cursor, or any other tool with agentic capabilities) to implement with
minimal hand-holding, and then use Copilot again with a new agent as a
code reviewer that checks the first agent's work. This mirrors how
software engineers increasingly work with AI in industry, with less
"pair programming" and more "delegating and reviewing."

Why This Matters: After experiencing the difference between
conversational AI coding and a multi-agent plan-delegate-review
workflow, you should begin to develop your own opinion about when each
approach works best.

What You'll Build

A command-line Python quiz app with a local login system that reads
questions from a JSON file, quizzes users, tracks scores and performance
statistics securely (in a non-human-readable format), allows users to
provide feedback on questions to influence future quiz selections, and
saves results. You'll extend it with one additional feature of your
choice.

While this might not be the most "original" app, it's complex enough to
be interesting (file I/O, data structures, user interaction, error
handling) and scoped enough that an AI agent can realistically build
most of it from a good spec. Perhaps most importantly, it also produces
clearly testable output, which makes the review phase meaningful.

Detailed Instructions

Phase 1: Write the Spec ~45 min

Before you touch Copilot, write a detailed specification for the quiz
app in a file called SPEC.md. This is the most important phase. A good
spec leads to a good agentic result; a vague spec leads to a mess.

Your spec must include:

- Behavior description: What does the app do, step by step, from the
  user's perspective? (e.g., "The app greets the user, asks how many
  questions they want, randomly selects that many from the question
  bank…")

- Data format: Your question bank should be a JSON file using the format
  below. Include at least 5 sample questions in your spec. (You may add
  more questions if you wish, but we would recommend waiting to do this
  until you have run one review pass (verification) and then manually
  assessed whether the quiz app is satisfactory (validation)).
  You may extend this format for your extension feature (e.g., adding a
  "difficulty" or "hint" field), but keep the base structure.

      {
        "questions": [
          {
            "question": "What keyword is used to define a function in Python?",
            "type": "multiple_choice",
            "options": ["func", "define", "def", "function"],
            "answer": "def",
            "category": "Python Basics"
          },
          {
            "question": "A list in Python is immutable.",
            "type": "true_false",
            "answer": "false",
            "category": "Data Structures"
          },
          {
            "question": "What built-in function returns the number of items in a list?",
            "type": "short_answer",
            "answer": "len",
            "category": "Python Basics"
          }
        ]
      }

- File structure: What files should exist and what does each one do?

- Error handling: What happens if the JSON file is missing? If the user
  enters invalid input? Specify at least 3 error cases.

- Required features:
  - A local login system that prompts users for a username and password
    (or allows them to enter a new username and password). The passwords
    should not be easily discoverable.
  - A score history file that tracks performance and other useful
    statistics over time for each user. This file should not be
    human-readable and should be relatively secure. (This means someone
    could look at the file and perhaps find out usernames but not
    passwords or scores.)
  - Users should somehow be able to provide feedback on whether they
    like a question or not, and this should inform what questions they
    get next.
  - The questions should exist in their own human-readable .json file so
    that they can be easily modified. (This lets you use the project for
    studying other subjects if you wish; all you have to do is generate
    the question bank.)
  - Note: None of this requires a backend, HTML, CSS, a graphical user
    interface, or the use of any APIs. Everything is local. If your
    project uses any of these things, you migth be over-engineering it.

- One extension feature of your choice. Examples:
  - Timed questions (user has N seconds to answer)
  - A "streak bonus" system that rewards consecutive correct answers
  - Difficulty levels that affect scoring
  - A "hint" system that costs points
  - Category-based filtering
  - … or your own idea!

- Acceptance criteria: A checklist of 5-8 specific things you'll check
  to decide if the implementation is "done." (e.g., "Running the app
  with an empty question bank prints a friendly error and exits with
  code 1.")

Important: Write this spec yourself, without AI assistance. The whole
point of this assignment is to see how the quality of your planning
affects the quality of the AI's output. Using AI to write the spec
defeats the purpose. (You can use AI to help you understand what a good
spec looks like, but the actual content should be yours.)

Phase 2: The Agentic Build ~60 min

Now hand your spec to Copilot and let it build. Here's how:

Setup

1.  Create a new project folder and initialize a git repo (git init).
    Commit your SPEC.md as the first commit.
2.  Open the folder in VS Code with the GitHub Copilot extension active.
3.  Open the Copilot Chat panel (Ctrl+Shift+I or Cmd+Shift+I) and switch
    to Agent mode (click the mode selector at the top of the chat panel.
    It should say "Agent" rather than "Ask" or "Edit").

The Prompt

Give Copilot a prompt like this (adapt to your own spec):

    Read SPEC.md in this project. Implement the full quiz application
    exactly as specified. Create all necessary files. Include the sample
    questions from the spec in the question bank JSON file. Make sure
    error handling matches what the spec describes. After creating the
    files, run the app to verify it starts without errors.

Rules for Phase 2

- Hands off (as much as possible). Let the agent work. Accept its file
  creation and terminal command prompts (to the extent that you are
  comfortable doing so). Your goal is to see how far it gets without
  your intervention.
- Track your interventions. If you do need to step in (to fix something,
  clarify something, or nudge it in a different direction), note each
  intervention in your log (see Deliverables). Interventions include
  follow-up prompts, manual code edits, or re-running something
  yourself.
- Commit the raw result. After Copilot finishes (or you decide it's
  done), commit everything as-is with a message like
  "Phase 2: Raw agentic build output". Don't fix anything first — we
  want to see what the agent produced.

Phase 3: The AI Review ~45 min

Now switch roles. Instead of using Copilot as a builder, use it as a
reviewer — an independent check on the code it just wrote.

Review Prompt

Open a new Copilot Chat session (click "+" to start fresh — this is
important so the reviewer doesn't have the builder's context). Then make
sure you are in agent mode and give it a prompt similar to this (but
probaby not exactly; e.g. you might want to check for usability / UX
issues too):

    Review the Python code in this project against the spec in SPEC.md.
    For each item in the acceptance criteria, check whether the code
    actually implements it correctly. Also check for:
    - Bugs or logic errors
    - Missing error handling
    - Code quality issues (unclear naming, repeated code, etc.)
    - Security concerns (e.g., unsafe file handling)

    Format your review as a numbered list of findings, each marked as
    [PASS], [FAIL], or [WARN]. Be specific — reference file names and
    line numbers.

Important: Save this review as REVIEW.md and add it to your repository!

Act on the Review

- Read the review carefully. Do you agree with its findings? Are there
  issues it missed? Are any of its criticisms wrong?
- Fix the real issues (you can use Copilot to help fix them).
- Commit the fixes: "Phase 3: Fixes after AI review".

Note: It is very important that you make multiple, frequent commits, at
the very least at the points specified above. This is largely how we
will know that you followed the correct process for this assignment.

Deliverables

  Item                                        Where                           Notes
  ------------------------------------------- ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  GitHub repo submitted through Google form   Submitted through Google form   Must show at least 3 commits (spec, raw build, post-review fixes with REVIEW.md)
  Working quiz app                            In repo                         Should run with python quiz.py (or similar)
  SPEC.md                                     In repo                         Your spec, written without AI
  REVIEW.md                                   In repo                         Copy of the AI review output from Phase 3
  REFLECTION.md                               In repo                         Your reflection (see below). Write this yourself — do not use AI.
  Portfolio                                   Your website                    Add a short entry for this project (screenshot, description, link)

Reflection

In REFLECTION.md, answer the following. Be honest and specific; there
are no wrong answers here, but you must write this yourself, without AI.
(Approx. 250-500 words total.)

1.  How far did the agent get? Did it fully implement your spec? What
    percentage of your acceptance criteria passed on the first try?
2.  Where did you intervene? List each time you had to step in during
    Phase 2. Why was the intervention needed? Could a better spec have
    prevented it?
3.  How useful was the AI review? Did it catch real bugs? Did it miss
    anything important? Did it flag things that weren't actually
    problems?
4.  Spec quality → output quality: In hindsight, what would you change
    about your spec to get a better result from the agent?
5.  When would you use this workflow? Based on this experience, when do
    you think plan-delegate-review is better than conversational
    back-and-forth? When is it worse?

Grading

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Grade                               (Roughly) What We're Looking For
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  A (90-100)                          High spec quality (clear, complete,
                                      specific acceptance criteria), app
                                      works reasonably well and includes
                                      required features + an extension,
                                      no egregious security concerns, 3+
                                      commits showing the assignment
                                      phases, interventions are logged,
                                      and the reflection is honest,
                                      specific, and thoughtful. All
                                      submission requirements met.

  B (80-89)                           Good spec quality (clear, complete,
                                      specific acceptance criteria), app
                                      includes required features + an
                                      extension, and runs with
                                      few-or-no-bugs or security
                                      concerns, 2+ thoughtful commits
                                      documenting the assignment phases,
                                      interventions are logged, and the
                                      reflection is honest/thoughtful if
                                      a little vague. All or almost all
                                      submission requirements met.
                                      (If some required features do not
                                      yet work, it may be possible to
                                      achieve this grade with an
                                      exceptionally thoughtful reflection
                                      on what went wrong.)

  C (70-79)                           Assignment mostly complete but
                                      shallow or with less attention to
                                      detail. Spec quality is likely
                                      substandard or the instructions
                                      were either ignored or followed but
                                      not documened. May be missing a
                                      component, like the REVIEW.md file.

  Below C                             Incomplete submission or
                                      insufficient thoughtfulness in key
                                      components/phases (for example, a
                                      poor spec or reflection, multiple
                                      misdocumented items, or clear use
                                      of AI to produce the SPEC.md or
                                      REFLECTION.md files).
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Grading philosophy reminder: We're grading your process and learning,
not the perfection of the final code. An honest reflection that says
"the agent completely botched feature X and here's why" is more valuable
than a perfect app with a vague reflection.

Tips

- Specificity is key. "Handle errors gracefully" is vague. "If the JSON
  file is missing, print 'Error: questions.json not found. Please create
  a question bank file.' and exit with code 1" is specific. Agents do
  much better with the second kind of instruction.
- Acceptance criteria are how you reliably reach the result you want.
  Think of them as a contract: if these things are true, the project is
  done. The more testable and concrete these are, the easier it is for
  both the agent and the reviewer to do their jobs.
- Fresh context for the review. Starting a new chat session for Phase 3
  matters. If the reviewer has the builder's conversation history, it's
  essentially grading its own homework. A fresh session gives you a more
  independent review.
  - As a maybe-interesting side-note, when Prof Kosbie and I make
    quizzes for 15-112, one of us makes the first draft, then the other
    one of us carefully reviews that draft and makes necessary
    high-level changes. Finally, we pass it off to our best TAs to
    scrutinize every detail. This is necessary because one cannot
    effectively review one's own work with the reliability of someone
    who does not have an existing mental model of the artifact.
- Don't panic if Phase 2 goes sideways. Part of the learning is seeing
  where agentic workflows break down. If the agent produces garbage,
  that's a great reflection topic. Fix what you can in Phase 3 and write
  about it.

Optional Challenge: Multi-Reviewer

If you finish early and want to explore further, try running multiple
review passes with different prompts — one focused on bugs, one on code
style, one on security. Compare what each reviewer catches. This is a
simplified version of how agentic code review systems work in industry
(parallel specialized reviewers). Document your findings in your
reflection if you try this.

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI | Spring 2026

Carnegie Mellon University | School of Computer Science
