HW9: Your First Mobile App

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI

← Back to Course Overview Requirements Instructions Key Concepts Tips

⚠️ Heads-up: We've updated this assignment to strongly recommend that
you either use an Android phone if you have one, or an iPhone simulator
otherwise.
You may attempt to use an actual iPhone if you have one and also have a
mac (by either following the Development Build without EAS option in
Expo, or if you have a paid Apple Developer Account you can probably use
Expo Go) but these routes are substantially harder, and we can't make
the instructions online any more concise or robust. We did put together
a repo with some Claude-generated instructions for iPhones without a
paid developer license (and for Android simulators), but we haven't been
able to test them on fresh devices so they may have bugs. I've put those
and the Expo-related Claude skills here in this repo.

Due Date: Wed. 4/8 at 8:00 PM (Note: This is updated from the original
Tue. 4/7 date)
Time Estimate: 3–4 hours (up to 6 if you go ambitious)
Deliverables: Code + README + prompt log on GitHub, short video, Google
form submission, portfolio entry

Assignment Overview

Goal: Build a mobile app capable of running on an actual phone or
simulator. You'll use React Native with Expo, a framework that lets you
build real iOS and Android apps using JavaScript. To do this assignment
successfully in a reasonable amount of time, you must leverage AI
thoughtfully. We strongly recommend an agentic workflow similar to what
you did in HW8. By the end of this assignment, you'll be able to show
off a real app that you created.

Why This Matters: Mobile apps are everywhere, and "I built a mobile app"
is one of the most impressive things you can put on a portfolio. Mobile
development has traditionally had a very steep learning curve, including
specialized languages and complex build tools that differ between
Android and iOS. After setting up your environment, using AI tools and
React Native with Expo will allow you to build a working app on your
phone in as little as an hour. This is still a challenging project,
however, and you will be unlikely to succeed unless you practice
attention to detail and use the strategies you have learned in class so
far.

Examples of what you might build:

- Flashcard study app — Create, review, and track your progress on
  flashcard decks for any subject
- Mood tracker — Log your mood each day with notes and see trends over
  time
- Countdown collection — Track countdowns to events you're excited about
  (spring break, graduation, concerts, etc.)
- Workout logger — Log exercises, sets, reps, and see your recent
  history
- Personal AI assistant — A mobile chatbot powered by Claude or GPT
  (requires a backend, similar to HW4)
- Daily quote/affirmation app — A fresh inspirational quote each day
  with the ability to save favorites

You're welcome to come up with your own idea! The key is that it should
be something you'd actually want on your phone as more than just a
webpage or webapp, and something you'd be excited to show other people.
Start simple for this assignment! If you have a bigger idea, that could
be a perfect choice for your capstone project.

Hardware challenges: Part of the barrier to app development is that
certain phones (specifically iPhones) require a fee in order to install
your app on your phone. Because of that, you are not required to run
your app on an actual phone, and it's ok to use a simulator instead. We
recommend developing on a physical Android phone if you have one, and on
an iPhone (or Android) simulator if you have an iPhone.

Learning with AI: This assignment is as much about learning a new
framework with AI as it is about the final product. React Native and the
Expo framework will almost certainly be completely new to you, and
that's the point. When AI generates code using unfamiliar patterns
(components, hooks, state, navigation), ask it to explain what
unfamiliar parts do and why. Your prompt log should show thoughtful
engagement with the code and the AI.

Requirements & Scoring

Core Requirements

- Multiple screens: Your app must have at least 2 screens with
  navigation between them (e.g., a home screen and a detail screen, or a
  list screen and an "add new item" screen).
- User input: Your app must accept meaningful user input in some
  form—text fields, buttons, toggles, pickers, sliders, etc. The app
  should respond to this input in a useful way.
- Data persistence: Your app must save at least one piece of data
  locally so that it survives closing and reopening the app. (You'll use
  AsyncStorage or a similar local storage solution for this. AI will
  help you set it up.)
- Can be demoed: You must demo your app running on an actual phone or a
  simulator. There are multiple paths to making each of these happen.
  - Note: Either path is valid; choose whatever hardware/environment
    works for you, and document which path you used in your README and
    video.
- Looks intentional: Your app doesn't need to be beautiful, but it
  should look like you made design choices: consistent colors, readable
  text, reasonable spacing. A few minutes of styling goes a long way.

Optional Enhancements (for extra ambition, not required)

- Integrate an AI API (Claude or OpenAI) to add intelligence to your app
  (this will require a backend, similar to HW4)
- Use a device feature like the camera, location services, haptic
  feedback, or push notifications
- Add animations or gesture-based interactions
- Build more than 2 screens with a tab-based or drawer navigation

Scope advice: A simple, polished 2-screen app is better than a buggy
5-screen app. Get the basics working first, then add features if you
have time. Many often underestimate how satisfying a clean, simple app
can be when it actually runs on your phone. Be aware that using external
APIs, phone sensors, and other sophisticated features may make it very
hard to achieve a working app without a reasonable understanding of the
code and how the Expo framework works.

What You Must Submit

- GitHub repository containing (at a minimum):
  1.  Code: Your complete Expo project. It should be runnable by cloning
      the repo, running npm install, and then npx expo start. (More info
      on these commands below.)
  2.  README.md: Located at the repository root. Include:
      - What your app does and why you chose this idea (1-2 sentences).
        Don't use AI to write this.
      - A description of each screen and what the user can do on it.
        Don't use AI to write this.
      - How to set up and run the app (any extra dependencies or API
        keys needed). You may use AI to write this piece but you are
        responsible for its accuracy.
      - One thing you learned about mobile development that surprised
        you. Don't use AI for this.
  3.  Prompt log (titled prompt_log.txt or prompt_log.md): Which AI
      tools you used, and the key prompts that shaped your work.
      Remember, share your actual prompts, verbatim, and not just
      summaries (AI generated or otherwise).For this assignment, we
      especially want to see prompts where you asked AI to explain React
      Native concepts—not just "build me a screen," but "what does
      useState do?" or "why do I need SafeAreaView?"
  4.  If you use an agentic development process, which we very very
      strongly recommend, you should also include your SPEC.md and
      REVIEW.md files.
- Portfolio: Add a link to your project repository on your portfolio
  with a brief description and a screenshot of the app running on your
  phone.
- Short video: A screen recording or phone recording (1-2 minutes)
  showing the app running on your phone or simulator. Walk through each
  screen, demonstrate the user input and data persistence (e.g., add
  something, close the app, reopen it, show it's still there). Upload to
  YouTube or Google Drive with appropriate view permissions so that we
  can see it.
- Google form: Fill out this form with your repo link, video link, and
  basic info before the deadline.

Grading

  Grade        (Roughly) What We're Looking For
  ------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  A (90-100)   App can be demoed and has at least 2 screens with navigation, meaningful user input, and data persistence. Looks intentional and polished. Clean README and prompt log that meet the assignment specifications and show learning (asking AI to explain, not just generate). Evidence of 3-4 hours of effort and some creativity in the concept. Video clearly demonstrates the app.
  B (80-89)    App runs and has most core features working (screens, input, persistence). Functional but may look rough around the edges. README and prompt log present but less detailed. Video might be a little unclear.
  C (70-79)    App runs but may be missing one core feature (e.g., no persistence, or only one screen). Basic README, prompt log, and video. Limited evidence of the learning process.
  Below C      App does not run, or submission is incomplete.

Step-by-Step Instructions

Follow these steps in order, and read carefully. Each one builds on the
last, and this sequence is designed to minimize the time you spend
stuck. If any step takes significantly longer than the time listed,
please ask on Ed or come to office hours!

Step 1: Set Up Your Environment (20 minutes)

For iPhone / iPhone simulator only:

If you're on a Mac, you'll need to install XCode on your laptop from the
App Store, and this may take about an hour to download. You should start
doing that right now.

For Android:

Search for "Expo Go" in the Google Play Store and install it.
Alternatively you can download a beta version of the Expo Go app if you
wish to use the very latest version, but we don't recommend this since
you'll probably have to unlock dev options on your phone.

For Everyone:

You need Node.js on your computer, and an AI-enabled code editor (you
probably already have VS Code or Cursor).

1.  Install Node.js (if you don't already have it): Download the LTS
    version from nodejs.org. After installing, verify it works by
    running node --version in your terminal. You should see a version
    number (18 or higher).
2.  Read and follow the Expo "Create a Project" tutorial:
    - IMPORTANT: The latest phone apps on the App Store and Play Store
      may be version 54, which is a step behind the dev tools. This
      means your phone might not be able to use your project unless you
      replace the 55 with a 54 in the first command of the tutorial:
      npx create-expo-app@latest --template default@sdk-54
    - Be sure to select either "Android Device" or "iOS Simulator" on
      the second tutorial screen. You should also select "Expo Go"
      instead of "Development build" to start with, though you may
      optionally do a Development build later if you wish. (You may
      attempt to make this work on your real iPhone, but the process
      will either be expensive and easy with Expo Go or free and
      difficult with a development build, so we don't recommend this
      right now.)
    - You will be running commands in your computer's terminal. For
      Windows this is the Command Prompt, and for macs this will be the
      Terminal. We don't recommend trying to run these in VS Code. These
      are not Python commands!
    - Note: When you reach the step where you run npx expo start in your
      terminal, it will take a moment to load, and then it will show a
      QR code in your terminal. If you are developing on an Android
      phone: Make sure your phone is on the same wifi network. Scan the
      code with your phone camera or the Expo Go app (Android). You
      should see a default "Welcome to Expo" screen appear on your
      phone. If you are developing on an iPhone sim: As long as you have
      XCode and the simulator installed, you should be able to press 'i'
      to open the simulator with your app.
    - You should read and follow the instructions up through the Next
      Steps page, and stop before running npm run reset-project since
      this will remove the demo code.

Important: Your phone and computer must be on the same Wi-Fi network for
Expo Go to connect. If you're on campus, CMU-SECURE should work. If the
QR code doesn't connect, try the "tunnel" option: press s to switch to
Expo Go, then try pressing shift+t to switch the connection to tunnel
mode. Ask on Ed if you're stuck—this is a common setup hiccup.

We very very strongly recommend using AI within your IDE, like Copilot,
Claude Code, Cursor, etc. You'll have an extremely bad time if you have
to constantly copy things into your browser.
Optional but extremely useful: Try to install the Expo AI skills found
here. I (Mike) had some trouble with installing the skills to Claude
initially, but I asked AI to look a the github repo with the skills and
to modify CLAUDE.md so that it has access to them. It created a .claude
directory with the cloned skills inside. You can find my CLAUDE.md and
claude directory here.
These skills are not strictly necessary, but they're documentation and
resources that your AI can use to research how to implement many of the
features that you might want. The installation process will vary for
each AI.

Step 2: Understand the Basics with AI (10 minutes)

Before you reset the project and start building, spend a few minutes
getting oriented. Open the App.js (or App.tsx) file that was generated
and ask AI some questions:

- "I'm brand new to React Native. Can you explain at a high level how
  these files create a working app?"
- "What's the difference between React Native and a regular website? How
  is a View different from a div?"
- "How do I add a button and a text input to a React Native screen? Show
  me a simple example and explain the useState hook."

Try making a small change to the app, like changing the text or a color,
and watch it update on your phone in real time. (If it does not update
immediately, you can go to your terminal and press 'r' to reload the
app.)

Step 3: Write Your App Specification (30 minutes)

Before you write any code, review the agentic process you used in HW8.
If you choose to use an agentic process for this assignment (which we
recommend), write a detailed specification for your app in a file called
SPEC.md. This is the most important step. As before, write this spec
yourself and be thorough. This will help ensure that the app matches
your vision and works well.

Keep your app idea simple: two screens, one or two key interactions, and
one type of data to persist is plenty.

Useful SPEC.md template: I created this blank SPEC.md template to help
me with this step, and I found it very useful. You may not need all of
these fields, but we recommend you start by copying this template and
then modifying it to suit your needs.

Step 4: The Agentic Build (45 minutes)

Assuming you use an agentic process (which is a very good idea) you'll
now hand your spec to your agent of choice (Copilot, Claude Code,
Cursor, etc.) and let it build. Refer to HW8 for guidance on the agentic
process.

Setup

1.  Add your SPEC.md into the project folder, add the folder to Github
    (in Github Desktop, click the current repository, click add, and
    click "add existing repository", and select your project folder) and
    make your first commit and push. Verify that you can see the app on
    github.com before proceeding.
2.  If you're lost, make sure you've completed the environment setup
    from Steps 1 and 2.
3.  Open the project folder in VS Code or Cursor or another AI-enabled
    IDE.

The Prompt

You might want to set your Agent to its most powerful setting for this
step (bearing your usage limits in mind). Give your agent a prompt like
this (adapt it to your actual spec):

    Read SPEC.md in this project. Implement the full mobile app exactly as specified. 
    Create all necessary files, components, and navigation. Make sure that appropriate data is persistent. 
    Avoid security risks for sensitive data.  Include proper error handling. 
    Make sure the app starts without errors and displays the home screen correctly.

Reminders

- Hands off (as much as possible). Let the agent work. You will likely
  need to accept some file creation and terminal command prompts. Your
  goal is to see how far it gets without your intervention.
- Test frequently on your phone. After the agent finishes, run
  npx expo start (or press 'r' to refresh the app if it is already
  running) and test the app on your phone.
- Commit the raw result. After the agent finishes (or you decide it's
  done), commit everything with a message like
  "Raw agentic build output". Don't fix anything before that commit. We
  want to see what the agent produced.

Step 5: The AI Review (45 minutes)

Review Setup

1.  Open a new chat session and make sure you're in Agent mode.

The Review Prompt

Give this new agent a prompt like:

    Review the React Native/Expo code in this project against the spec in SPEC.md. 
    For each acceptance criterion in the spec, verify whether the code actually implements it correctly. 
    Also check for:
    - Bugs or logic errors
    - Missing error handling
    - Code quality issues (unclear naming, repeated code, etc.)
    - Best practices for React Native or other technologies

    Format your review as a numbered list of findings, each marked as [PASS], [FAIL], or [WARN]. 
    Be specific. Reference file names and line numbers. 
    Export the review as REVIEW.md at the root of the project.

Act on the Review

- Read the review carefully. Do you agree with its findings? Are there
  issues it missed?
- Save the REVIEW.md file in your repository. (Ask the agent to export
  it, or copy it manually.)
- Fix real issues flagged as [FAIL] or critical [WARN] items. You can
  use AI to help, but you're responsible for the fixes.
- Commit the fixes, with a commit message like "Fixes after AI review".

Step 6: Polish, Test, and Verify (30 minutes)

With the core features working, now polish your app:

- Visual polish: Choose a consistent color scheme (2-3 colors), ensure
  text is readable, add clear titles/headers to each screen, make
  buttons look tappable.
- Thorough testing: Walk through every acceptance criterion and verify
  each one works on your phone. Test edge cases.
- Verify data persistence: Add data, close Expo Go completely, reopen
  it, and confirm the data is still there.
- Make any final adjustments needed.
- Commit with a message like "Polish and final adjustments".

Step 7: Document and Submit (30 minutes)

Write your README and prompt log, record your video, add the project to
your portfolio, push to GitHub, and fill out the Google form.

For the video, the easiest approach is to screen-record your phone or
simulator, or to simply record your phone screen with another device.
Walk through each screen, show the user interactions, and demonstrate
data persistence.

Important: Your prompt log should include actual prompts, verbatim. Some
recommended examples include:

- Your initial build prompt to the agent
- Your review prompt to the second agent
- Any follow-up prompts or clarifications during the phases
- Prompts where you asked AI to explain React Native or Expo concepts
- Notes on any manual interventions you made and why

Key Concepts

Here's a reference for the new concepts in this assignment. AI will help
you with all of these, but it's useful to know what you're working with.

- React Native: A framework for building mobile apps using JavaScript.
  Unlike a web app, React Native produces real native mobile components
  (not a website in a wrapper). The code you write looks similar to web
  React, but instead of <div> and <p>, you use <View> and <Text>.
- Expo: A platform that simplifies React Native development. It handles
  the complex build process, provides a library of pre-built features
  (camera, location, notifications, etc.), and gives you Expo Go for
  instant testing on your phone. Think of Expo as "React Native made
  easy."
- Expo Go: The app on your phone that runs your project during
  development. When you scan the QR code, Expo Go downloads your latest
  code and runs it. No app store publishing needed.
- Components: The building blocks of a React Native app. Everything on
  screen is a component: View (a container, like a <div>), Text
  (displays text), TextInput (text field), Button (a button), FlatList
  (a scrollable list), Image (displays images), etc.
- State (useState): The way React Native tracks data that can change.
  When state updates, the screen automatically re-renders to reflect the
  new data. Example: const [count, setCount] = useState(0); creates a
  count variable and a setCount function to update it.
- Props: Data passed from a parent component to a child component. For
  example, when you write <Text style={{color: 'red'}}>Hello</Text>,
  style is a prop being passed to the Text component.
- Navigation: The system for moving between screens. React Navigation is
  the most popular library. A "stack navigator" works like a stack of
  cards—you push a new screen on top, and you can go back to the
  previous one.
- AsyncStorage: A simple, persistent key-value storage system for React
  Native. Works like a mobile version of localStorage in web browsers.
  Data survives app restarts.
- Hot reload: When you save a file, Expo automatically updates the app
  on your phone within seconds. This makes development fast and
  iterative.

Tips

- Get the "Hello World" running first. Before writing any real code,
  make sure that you can get the example app working on your phone or
  simlator. If setup takes longer than 20 minutes (aside from installing
  XCode on macs, which will take while to download), ask on Ed or in
  office hours. We predict that setup problems will be the #1 time sink
  on this assignment, and we can usually resolve them quickly.
- Build incrementally. After the initial build, add one feature at a
  time and test on your phone after each change. React Native's hot
  reload makes this fast. If something breaks, you'll know exactly what
  caused it. Trying to do too much all at once will likely be the #2
  source of trouble.
- Use AI to learn, not just to generate. You should come out of this
  with at least some insight into how an app is structured in Expo. This
  is the learning goal of the assignment, and your prompt log should
  show it.
- Don't fight the styling system. React Native uses Flexbox for layout
  (similar to CSS Flexbox). If positioning is driving you crazy, ask AI:
  "How does Flexbox layout work in React Native? I'm trying to put X
  above Y with Z on the right." A few minutes understanding Flexbox will
  save you a lot of trial and error.
- Keep your app idea simple. Two screens, one main feature, and local
  data persistence is a very solid app. You can always add more if you
  finish early, but you can't get time back from an overly ambitious
  plan. Some of the best apps are simple apps that do one thing well.
- Restart the development server if things get weird. If your app starts
  behaving unexpectedly, stop the Expo server (Ctrl+C in the terminal)
  and restart it with npx expo start. Also try shaking your phone in
  Expo Go to access the developer menu, where you can reload the app.

Setup Resources

- Node.js download — Install the LTS version
- Expo Go — Download for iOS or Android
- Expo: Create your first app — Official getting-started guide
- Mike's repo of Claude skills + Claude-generated setup instructions for
  running on actual iPhones or Android sims.

React Native Resources

- React Native documentation — Official docs with explanations of every
  component
- React Navigation — The library you'll use for moving between screens
- AsyncStorage documentation — How to save and load data locally
- Expo SDK documentation — Camera, location, notifications, and many
  more device features

Troubleshooting

- "I can't connect to my phone" — Make sure both devices are on the same
  Wi-Fi network. Try tunnel mode by pressing shift+t in the Expo
  terminal. On campus, use CMU-SECURE.
- "My app crashes when I open it" — Check the terminal for error
  messages. The most common cause is a syntax error or a missing import.
  AI is very good at diagnosing React Native error messages. Paste the
  error and ask.
- "npm install is failing" — Try deleting the node_modules folder and
  package-lock.json file, then running npm install again. If that
  doesn't work, ask on Ed with the exact error message.
- "I don't have a smartphone" — You can use an emulator (Android
  Studio's emulator or Xcode's simulator on Mac). Ask on Ed and we'll
  help you set one up. You can also use Expo Snack, an online editor
  that includes a phone simulator in the browser. We'd still like you to
  get a simulator locally installed, but this might work in a pinch.

Questions? Ask on Ed, attend office hours, or email the instructor.
Consult the course AI usage and collaboration policies on the course
homepage.

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI | Spring 2026

Carnegie Mellon University | School of Computer Science
