Project 3: The Capstone

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI

← Back to Course Overview Requirements Instructions Tips

Checkpoint Due Date: Mon. 4/20 at 8:00 PM
Final Due Date: Thu. 4/23 at 8:00 PM
Time Estimate: ~8 hours (spread over ~2 weeks)
Deliverables: Source code on GitHub (including README.md + prompt log +
reflection) + live demo + short video + Google form response

Assignment Overview

Goal: Simply put, make something extremely cool that demonstrates your
technical skills and design sensibilities, while using AI effectively as
part of your process. This project should be portfolio-ready, and an
asset that you will be eager to show off in the future. The format is
very open-ended, but we will be looking for attention to detail,
thoughtful use of AI, clear documentation of your process, and
demonstrable learning since the start of the semester.

Timeline: Roughly two weeks to complete. Expect to spend about 8 hours
of focused work. We'll have at least two hours of working time in-class.
There will be a checkpoint at the beginning of the final week (Mon.
4/20) where we'll expect to see a working demo, and then you'll have
until Thu. 4/24 to polish everything up and make your final submission.

Why This Matters: Like Projects 1 and 2, this project is meant to open
doors for you. This assignment asks you to combine your technical skills
with responsible and strategic AI usage to produce a project you can
show in interviews and on your portfolio. It's also very open-ended,
which is actually part of the challenge. What will you create in a
mostly-unconstrained space? It could be a web app, a phone app,
something that only runs locally, or something else entirely as long as
it demonstrates your mastery of Effective Coding with AI.

Note: Like what followed Project 2, there will be an oral exam in the
last week where we will expect you to understand and be able to explain
what each part of the code is responsible for. Once again, you'll also
need to write or substantially modify at least some of your code, so be
careful not to just vibe-code until it's too complicated for you to
grasp. As you work, ask yourself this: Would you be comfortable
discussing this project in an in-person technical job interview, without
notes? If not, begin investing effort in understanding the code the AI
has written for you, or focus on simplifying the project until you feel
you understand and can discuss it.

Requirements & Grading

What You Must Submit

- Source code on GitHub: A public repository (or a clearly named folder
  inside your GitHub Pages portfolio repo) containing your project code
  and documentation, including these required files in the project root
  or folder:
  - README.md — must be named README.md and located at the repository
    root (or inside the project folder if you placed the project in your
    portfolio repo). The README should explain: what the project does,
    how to use it, which features you are most proud of, how to run it
    locally, and how secrets (if any) are handled. (Note that even if
    you deploy in github pages, this should be a new README for just
    this project.)
  - Prompt log — titled PROMPT_LOG.txt or PROMPT_LOG.md, and located in
    the same folder as your README. It must list which AI model(s)/tools
    you used, document the development process from start to finish
    (including which parts of the code were written or substantially
    modified by you), and include important, non-trivial prompts. (These
    should be quoted prompts, not just summaries.) As a whole, this file
    and your commit history should make it obvious that you invested
    roughly 8 hours of work.
  - Reflection — titled REFLECTION.txt or REFLECTION.md or
    REFLECTION.pdf, and located in the same folder as your README. See
    Reflection section below for details.
- Portfolio link: The project must be linked from the "Projects" section
  of your deployed portfolio website (i.e. Project 1).
- Short demo video: A short screen-recorded video that shows how the app
  works and explains the main technical choices; upload to YouTube/Drive
  and include the link in the Google form. Put a little love into this
  one! Give it some sound, make it something that will get people
  excited!
  - Note: Show your project running where it is meant to be run! In
    other words, if you create a webapp, your video should show it
    running in a deployed state, non-locally. If you create a phone app,
    your video should show it running on an actual phone. If you create
    something meant to run on a potato, you're going to have to show us
    that potato.
- Google form: Fill out the project submission form with your repository
  URL and video link.
- Midpoint check-in: There will be one required in-person check-in
  (similar to what we did for Projects 1 and 2) due by Monday 4/20 at
  8pm so you can receive feedback and adjust direction. More so than
  before, we will expect to see substantial progress and a
  mostly-working project by this date. Details to follow.
- Final presentation / oral exam: These will likely be done on Thursday
  and Friday of the final week, with perhaps a few slots on Saturday. If
  you choose a time before the final submission deadline, this gives you
  some time to fix any issues discovered during the presentation.
  Details to follow, but these will be similar to what we did for
  Project 2. These must be done in-person.

Privacy & Security: Do not commit API keys, credentials, or secrets to
GitHub. Store secrets as environment variables or use Render/Vercel
secret management.

Grading

Full credit requires a working, well-documented, and thoughtfully
designed project. Special emphasis will be placed on:

- Clear README and comprehensive prompt log, thoughtful reflection
- Evidence of meaningful learning and manual code work (not just
  copy-paste from AI)
- Evidence of ~8 hours of work specifically for Project 2 (i.e. we
  should see your project take shape over several github commits
  throughout the project period)
- Robust and thoughtfully designed and tested user interface, and
  attention to detail in the user experience (it should be engaging and
  richly interactive with no common bugs)
- Correct, secure handling of any relevant secrets and APIs

You may reuse and/or improve upon code from earlier assignments, but we
still expect ~8 hours of *new* work for this project.

Detailed Instructions

1.  Decide on a creative idea. Pick a project that excites you and can
    be completed in ~8 hours. Focus on something that will be useful or
    impressive on your portfolio. The safest ideas will be those that
    you can get working relatively quickly, but which have many features
    that you can add and improve once the core is working.

First focus on substance over polish: Demonstrate clear functionality
and learning. UI polish will help your grade, but the graders will first
evaluate for functionality and technical implementation.

2.  Build the core app. You may use any stack (i.e. any combination of
    technologies) that meets the project requirements, but make sure
    your project includes at least two of the following:
    - Frontend-backend communication (e.g., fetch + API endpoint)
    - Thoughtful third-party API usage with secure keys
    - Use of a database
    - Use of Expo and/or React Native or something else that allows it
      to run on a physical phone
    - Substantial data analysis or visualization
    - Exceptionally rich interactivity through a technology we haven't
      explored yet, like WebGL
    - Use of a computer vision or ML module/algorithm
    - (If these features really don't fit your idea, talk to Mike ASAP
      in case we can work something out.)

    Also include at least one substantial part of the code that you
    wrote or meaningfully modified yourself so you can explain it in
    person or on video.
3.  Document thoroughly and document as you build (rather than just at
    the end). Add a clear README.md and a detailed prompt log
    (prompt_log.txt or similar) that shows your workflow and AI usage.
    Include your SPEC.md and REVIEW.md if you use an agentic process!
4.  Commit and push changes regularly. We will expect to see several
    commits made to your repository over the two-week project period,
    since this will be evidence for sustained effort. We recommend
    pushing your changes whenever you are done working each day. (This
    also prevents you from losing your progress if your computer breaks
    at the deadline, which will happen to at least one or two of you.
    And if for some reason you aren't able to submit the form on time,
    we could in theory still find and grade your existing work, which is
    good for you and good for us.)
5.  Attend the midpoint in-person check-in. Bring as much working code
    as possible and be ready to describe progress and remaining work.
6.  Test end-to-end. Make sure the deployed frontend talks to any
    backend services (if applicable). Make sure that error states are
    handled gracefully (i.e. try not to crash due to unexpected user
    behavior, and provide sensible error messages for issues that cannot
    be avoided, like a backend server outage). We strongly recommend
    testing any backends locally first, in order to speed up the
    debugging process.
7.  Write your reflection. See below for more details, and include it in
    your repository.
8.  Push to GitHub (& deploy if relevant). Deploy the app (in whatever
    form makes sense for your project) and verify any links work. If
    creating a phone app, make sure it runs on your phone and ideally
    someone else's phone too.
9.  Record a short demo video. Show the app running (in its deployed
    location, not just locally unless it only makes sense to do so) and
    briefly explain the architecture and the portion of code you
    implemented yourself.
10. Complete the Google form. Submit your repository URL and video link
    before the deadline.

Reflection

In REFLECTION.md, answer the following. Be honest and specific; there
are no wrong answers here, but you must write this yourself, without AI.
(Approx. 250-500 words total.)

1.  Describe your process. At a high level, how did you go about
    creating this project?
2.  What AI tools and strategies did you use? What models did you
    choose, and were you using them in a browser chat, in something like
    Cursor, in the command line, etc? Did you use an agentic process
    like in HW8, or something else?
3.  Why did you make the choices above?
4.  What changed from your pre-113 approach? Compare your approach to
    how you might have approached the project before 15-113. What has
    changed, if anything? Do you feel more or less well-equipped to
    create projects like this within a reasonable time frame?
5.  What might you do with this project with more time?

Tips (Mostly repeated from Project 2)

- Having trouble coming up with an idea? Talk to a actual human! Maybe
  even our TAs! Compared to AI, they'll be able to give you a better
  sense for what might be feasible and what you might want to consider.
- Start with a clear MVP (Minimum Viable Product): Implement one core
  feature well, test it, then add extras as allowed by time.
- Test locally first: Run and debug your app locally before deploying.
  Use curl or browser devtools to validate requests and responses.
- Store secrets safely: Use environment variables or Render/Vercel
  secret management; do not commit keys to GitHub.
- Handle errors gracefully: Return helpful error messages from the
  backend and show friendly messages in the UI.
- Document everything: The README + prompt log are part of the grade —
  be explicit about what you built and how AI helped.
- Write a thoughtful reflection: This is a large part of how we will
  gauge if you have pushed yourself to be creative and if you have
  learned new skills.
- Be prepared to explain: You should be ready to verbally explain the
  architecture, and especially the parts of the code you wrote or
  modified using your own technical skills.

Note: Start early and back up your work! We aren't willing to extend the
deadline into Finals Week (except perhaps in a very rare and serious
emergency, under the guidance of your advisor) so you should try to get
done early, especially since we're looking for a mostly-working project
by the checkpoint. Extensions on this project for typical reasons
(illnesses, broken computers, etc) are very unlikely, even on the
checkpoint, since this will delay useful feedback.

Questions? Ask on Ed, attend office hours, or email the instructor.
Consult the course AI usage and collaboration policies on the course
homepage.

CMU 15-113: Effective Coding with AI | Spring 2026

Carnegie Mellon University | School of Computer Science
