[] CMU 17-316/616: AI Tools for Software Development

Home

Overview Overview

On This Page

-  Course Description
-  Course Structure

Syllabus

Teamwork Practices

Staff

Assignments

Assignments

-  Reflection 1
-  Reflection 2
-  Reflection 3
-  Reflection 4
-  Reflection 5
-  Reflection 6

Project

Project

-  Project 1 Requirements Engineering
-  Project 2 Development Specifications
-  Project 3 Frontend Development
-  Project 4 Backend Development
-  Project 5 Testing
-  Project 6 Deployment
-  Project 7 Final Demo + Postmortem

On This Page

-  Course Description
-  Course Structure

Overview

Course Description¶

Students will learn how to use AI-based developer tools across the
software development lifecycle, for example in coding, code reviewing,
project management, automated testing, and security. The course will
require significant software development practice, both with and without
AI tools. Students will use their experiences to analyze the impact of
AI tools on software productivity across individuals, teams, and
organizations. Students will be expected to code in scripting languages
(e.g., Python and JavaScript), set up development environments, read
documentation, and learn new libraries and frameworks.

Course Structure¶

This class will consist of:

- Mini-lectures. Lectures will cover technical content and be delivered
  by the professors or guest lecturers.
- In-class programming activities. We will have pair programming
  activities and "mob" programming activities. These will be for
  learning techniques and tools that you will then use for your group
  project. Each student will lead at least one mob session.
- Reflections. For homework, you will write 500-word essays answering a
  set of assigned questions about your experience using AI so far.
- Readings. We may assign supplmentary readings from online sources that
  are relevant to the activities or discussion.
- In-class presentations and discussions. Based on the reflections,
  groups will create short presentations, present them to the class, and
  lead a short discussion.
- Group project. During this course, you will build a web application
  using AI. The major milestones will be a vibe-coded MVP, requirements,
  backend implementation, frontend implementation, testing, and
  deployment.
- Team meetings. We will provide time teams to meet about their project.
  Participation is mandatory.

The course calendar follows a two-week cycle:

- Monday: Pair programming activity.
- Wednesday: Team meeting, mini-lecture, and mob programming activity.
- Homework: Reflection essay.
- Monday: Team meeting, mini-lecture, and mob programming activity.
- Wednesday: Presentations and discussions.
- Project: Two-week sprint milestone.

There will be no exams. The final exam day will be used for final
project presentations.

[] Back to top
