[] CMU 17-316/616: AI Tools for Software Development

Home

Overview

Syllabus

Teamwork Practices

Staff

Assignments

Assignments

-  Reflection 1
-  Reflection 2
-  Reflection 3
-  Reflection 4
-  Reflection 5
-  Reflection 6

Project

Project

Project 1 Requirements Engineering

Project 2 Development Specifications Project 2 Development
Specifications

On This Page

-  Learning Goals
-  Project Context
-  Deliverables
-  Turn-in Instructions

Project 3 Frontend Development

Project 4 Backend Development

Project 5 Testing

Project 6 Deployment

Project 7 Final Demo + Postmortem

On This Page

-  Learning Goals
-  Project Context
-  Deliverables
-  Turn-in Instructions

Project 2: Development Specification¶

Learning Goals¶

- Learn how to translate user stories into a structured development
  specification.
- Learn how to guide an LLM to generate architecture diagrams, class
  diagrams, flow charts, and other technical artifacts.
- Learn how to critically assess risks, interfaces, and technologies
  when planning software implementation.

Project Context¶

In Project 1, you performed user discovery and created user stories with
the help of LLMs. In Project 2, you will take three of those stories and
expand them into a complete development specification (dev spec). This
spec should serve as a blueprint for how you would build the product. By
the end of this milestone, you will have a concrete technical plan,
informed by your interviews, user stories, and the practices we’ve
learned in class.

Your dev spec will also be a test of how effectively you can collaborate
with LLMs on technical writing, while still applying your own
engineering judgment.

Deliverables¶

Choose 3 user stories from your user stories in P1 and have an LLM
expand them into dev specs. Your team must produce a spec for each of
the 3 that includes the following sections with enough detail that you
(or someone else) could implement it:

1.  Header
2.  Architecture Diagram
    1.  Specify where the components run (e.g., client, server, cloud,
        etc.).
    2.  Specify which information flows between components.
3.  Class Diagram
4.  List of Classes
5.  State Diagrams
6.  Flow Chart
7.  Development Risks and Failures
8.  Technology Stack
9.  APIs
10. Public Interfaces
11. Data Schemas
12. Security and Privacy
13. Risks to Completion

Two of the three user stories should be independent of one another,
however, the all dev specs must reflect that they are implemented in the
same application.

The third user story must be dependent on one of other two, i.e., the
stories are intertwined somehow (e.g., one implements a shared text
editor and the other implements a way to make text in that editor bold).
Practically for this assignment, the third user story's dev spec may
require you to make modifications to the dependent user story's dev spec
in order to add it to the plan.

We noticed that it's easy for the LLM to create inconsistencies between
the sections in the dev spec. For example, there may be more classes
shown in the class diagram than described in the List of Classes. That's
something you'll have to look for and fix before turning in your
assignment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Turn-in Instructions¶

Please turn in a single document that contains these parts:

1.  The three user stories from P1 that you chose to expand into a dev
    spec, listed at the beginning of your document.
    1.  Add the user stories to GitHub and turn in the links to each
        user story.
2.  First dev spec document containing all the sections above. Each
    section should have rationale to justify your decisions. After each
    section, copy-paste the chat log showing your prompts and the LLM’s
    responses.
    1.  Commit this dev spec into your GitHub repo and turn in the link
        to it.
3.  Second dev spec document containing all the sections above. Each
    section should have rationale to justify your decisions. After each
    section, copy-paste the chat log showing your prompts and the LLM’s
    responses.
    1.  Commit this dev spec into your GitHub repo and turn in the link
        to it.
4.  Third dev spec document (this is the one dependent on one of the
    previous two user stories) containing all the sections above. Each
    section should have rationale to justify your decisions. After each
    section, copy-paste the chat log showing your prompts and the LLM’s
    responses.
    1.  Add an explanation of how the other user story's dev spec was
        modified to accommodate this user story's features.
    2.  Commit this dev spec into your GitHub repo and turn in the link
        to it.
5.  A 1–2 paragraph reflection on how useful the LLM was in helping you
    create the dev specs, and what parts required the most human
    correction/reprompting.

[] Back to top
