[] CMU 17-316/616: AI Tools for Software Development

Home

Overview

Syllabus

Teamwork Practices

Staff

Assignments

Assignments

-  Reflection 1
-  Reflection 2
-  Reflection 3
-  Reflection 4
-  Reflection 5
-  Reflection 6

Project

Project

Project 1 Requirements Engineering

Project 2 Development Specifications

Project 3 Frontend Development Project 3 Frontend Development

On This Page

-  Learning Goals
-  Project Context
-  Deliverables
  -  1. UI Mockups in Figma
  -  2. Frontend Implementation
  -  3. Reflection
-  Turn-in Instructions

Project 4 Backend Development

Project 5 Testing

Project 6 Deployment

Project 7 Final Demo + Postmortem

On This Page

-  Learning Goals
-  Project Context
-  Deliverables
  -  1. UI Mockups in Figma
  -  2. Frontend Implementation
  -  3. Reflection
-  Turn-in Instructions

Project 3: Frontend Development¶

Learning Goals¶

- Learn how to transform development specifications into a working user
  interface.
- Learn how to use Figma's AI tools to create mockups.
- Learn how to collaborate with LLMs to generate frontend code, while
  refining and debugging the output, with a mocked backend.

Project Context¶

In P1, you defined requirements and user stories. In P2, you expanded
some of those stories into detailed development specifications. In P3,
you will use an LLM to implement the front end of your application.

Begin by creating polished UI/UX mockups in Figma for your user stories.
Then, you’ll use those mockups and the development specifications to use
LLMs to generate the frontend. Since the backend isn’t fully implemented
yet, you will need to mock the backend to simulate functionality.

The emphasis here is on getting something real and visual, even if it’s
only partially functional. By the end of this sprint, you’ll have
mockups, a working frontend implementation, and mocked backend to power
the interface.

Remember, use the LLMs as much as possible to generate the deliverables.
You may not modify any generated graphics or code directly, only by
prompting the LLM.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Deliverables¶

Choose two of the three user stories from P2: Development Specification
whose front end you will implement. They must include one independent
user story and one user story dependent on the first one.

Note: If you are having second thoughts about the user stories you
submitted for P1, you may update them.

1. UI Mockups in Figma¶

Create high-fidelity mockups for each of your two chosen user stories.

- Include all states of the interface: e.g., empty state, loading,
  error, success, etc.
- Include enough detail about the intended graphical design in your
  Figma project to help a developer to implement the appropriate CSS and
  layout code. For example, if your design needs to relayout in a
  specific way when the window is stretched or zoomed, please annotate
  the design with the behavior you want to see.
- Write up the rationale for major design choices (e.g., navigation
  flow, component reuse, accessibility).

Check in high-resolution screenshots of your mockups into your project's
GitHub repository.

2. Frontend Implementation¶

Implement the user stories in code using a popular frontend framework
(e.g., React, Svelte).

- Using your LLM, generate the front end code from your user stories,
  Figma mockups (with their design rationale and developer
  implementation guides), and development specifications.
- Include responsive design for at least two screen sizes.
- Ensure accessibility compliance with WCAG and alt-text for images
  where appropriate.
- Ensure any backend functionality or data is mocked such that the
  frontend functionality can be demonstrated.

Important: The code for both user stories must be generated into the
same frontend application. Watch out for duplicated functionality,
inconsistent class names, and incomplete interfaces.

- Screen record yourself testing the frontend implementation in a web
  browser (include appropriate voiceover narration so we can follow what
  you're trying to show). It should display correctly at your two
  different screen sizes. Use the browser's debugger to accurately set
  the screen size during testing. Resize the browser window with your
  mouse/finger to test for proper layout logic.
- Upload the screen recording to YouTube.

Check in the frontend implementation to your GitHub repository.

3. Reflection¶

Write a 500-word (i.e., one-page) reflection on:

1.  How effective was the LLM in generating the frontend code? What did
    you like about the result?
2.  What was wrong with what the LLM generated? What were you able to
    fix it easily? What problems were more difficult to fix?
3.  How did you validate that the implementation was complete and
    correct? Did you use the LLM to help?
4.  How did you test the functionality of the implementation? Explain
    the steps you took and why you did them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Turn-in Instructions¶

Please turn in a single document that contains these parts:

1.  The two user stories that you implemented.
2.  Provide a link to the Figma project with your mockups. Be sure that
    the instructors have read access to this project or you will receive
    no points for this deliverable.
3.  Provide links to each of the mockup's high-resolution screenshots as
    they are checked into GitHub.
4.  Link to the folder with the code in GitHub.
5.  Link to the YouTube video of your application test. You may set its
    visibility to private, but be sure that the instructors have read
    access to it or you will receive no points for this deliverable.
6.  A 1-page reflection.
7.  Copy-paste logs of all LLM interactions you used during this sprint.

[] Back to top
