[] CMU 17-316/616: AI Tools for Software Development

Home

Overview

Syllabus

Teamwork Practices

Staff

Assignments

Assignments

-  Reflection 1
-  Reflection 2
-  Reflection 3
-  Reflection 4
-  Reflection 5
-  Reflection 6

Project

Project

Project 1 Requirements Engineering

Project 2 Development Specifications

Project 3 Frontend Development

Project 4 Backend Development Project 4 Backend Development

On This Page

-  Learning Goals
-  Project Context
-  Deliverables
  -  1. Update your Development Specs
  -  2. Specify the Backend
    -  Architecture
    -  Backend Modules
    -  Wrap it up
  -  3. Reflection
-  Turn-in Instructions

Project 5 Testing

Project 6 Deployment

Project 7 Final Demo + Postmortem

On This Page

-  Learning Goals
-  Project Context
-  Deliverables
  -  1. Update your Development Specs
  -  2. Specify the Backend
    -  Architecture
    -  Backend Modules
    -  Wrap it up
  -  3. Reflection
-  Turn-in Instructions

Project 4: Backend Development¶

Learning Goals¶

- Learn how to transform development specifications into a working
  backend.
- Learn how to collaborate with LLMs to generate backend code, while
  refining and debugging the output, with a real or mocked frontend.

Project Context¶

In P1, you defined requirements and user stories. In P2, you expanded
some of those stories into detailed development specifications. In P3,
you implemented two user stories for the front end of your application.
In P4, you will implement the backend of your application.

Begin by reading over the user stories you chose to implement for P3.
For each of these user stories, you had the LLM generate development
specifications in P2. Look over the architecture plans for each of these
development specs. First, if you haven't done it yet, have the LLM
harmonize the two architecture plans and diagrams to ensure that the LLM
knows you are building a single backend for the application that can
support both user stories.

For each module in your architecture, decide whether it will be part of
the frontend or backend. Recall that frontend components usually handle
the application's user interfaces and the business logic. The backend
often handles data storage (separate data stores for each tenant),
compute-intensive algorithms (e.g. machine learning, audio/video codecs,
path routing), calls out to external backend services (e.g. speech
transcription, image recognition, authentication, cryptography, etc.),
and networking to and from other frontend UIs connected to the same
backend. In P4, you only need to specify and implement the backend
modules.

By the end of this sprint, you'll have a working backend implementation
plus loads of documentation describing how it works. Recall that every
module lives in a single backend and should make the same technical
choices to minimize the number of redundant internal and external
dependencies.

Remember to use the LLMs as much as possible to generate your
deliverables. You may not modify any generated code directly, only by
prompting the LLM.

Note

Make sure your backend supports 10 simultaneous frontend users.
Simultaneity means that all of those users' frontend UIs are talking to
the backend at the same time. Do not attempt to make your backend scale
to more users.

Note

Consider whether you need to have a working frontend to tell if your
backend works or not. It is ok to mock the frontend (from the backend's
point of view) if it helps you make timely progress.

Note

Your backends will (eventually) be deployed to Amazon Web Services
(AWS). Let that influence your choice of external backend services,
especially if the cost is zero or minimal. In P4, you need to mock any
calls to external services. However in P5, you will be able to create an
AWS account with $100-200 free credits and will be usable for 6 months
(or until the credits are exhausted) to call those services.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Deliverables¶

You will implement the backend for the same two user stories that you
implemented in P3. Remember that one of these user stories is
independent and the other is dependent on the first one.

1. Update your Development Specs¶

Create new development specs for each of your two chosen user stories
that have a single, harmonized backend specification, i.e. the specs
assume that there's a single backend that powers both user stories.

- Include the entire development spec for each user story.
- Have the LLM generate mermaid diagrams for any required diagram and
  add photos of those diagrams to your submission.

2. Specify the Backend¶

Architecture¶

- Create a single, unified architecture for the backend that supports
  both user stories. Write down a text description to describe it and
  draw it as a Mermaid diagram. Justify your design choices as if you
  were speaking to a senior architect with your company.

Backend Modules¶

For every backend module in this architecture, do the following (with
assistance from the LLM):

1.  Specify the module's features. What can it do? What does it not do?
    These should be written to be understandable by a professional
    backend developer.
2.  Design the internal architecture for the module. Write down a text
    description to describe it and draw it as a Mermaid diagram. Justify
    your design choices as if you were speaking to a senior architect
    with your company.
3.  Define the data abstraction used in the module. If it helps you or
    the LLM to think about this formally, take a look at Reading 13 from
    MIT's 6.005 class.
4.  Determine the stable storage mechanism for the module (i.e. you
    can't just use an in-memory data structure because your app might
    crash and lose its memory. Customers really hate data loss.)
    1.  Define any data schemas required to communicate with any storage
        databases.
5.  Define a clear, unambiguous API for external callers of this module.
    We suggest employing a REST API for any services accessible over the
    web.
6.  Provide a list of all class, method, and field declarations.
    Identify which are externally visible and which are private to the
    module.
7.  Draw a Mermaid class hierarchy diagram that shows the
    module-internal view of each class.
8.  Use the LLM to generate the code for each class.

Wrap it up¶

1.  Write and run the minimum required testing code to ensure that the
    user stories whose program path uses each module's API works as
    expected. Don't worry about exceptional cases for now.
2.  Check your code into the GitHub repository for your project.
3.  Check in any code you write to test the functionality of your
    module.
4.  Create a README for your backend source code.
    1.  Describe every dependency on an external library, framework,
        technology, or service required (or optionally required) by the
        module.
    2.  What databases does this module create, read from, and write to?
    3.  Describe how to intall, startup, stop, and reset the backend
        services and data storage. Assume the user of these docs is a
        site reliability engineer who has been newly assigned to work
        with your team.

3. Reflection¶

Write a 500-word (i.e., one-page) reflection on:

1.  How effective was the LLM in generating the backend code? What did
    you like about the result?
2.  What was wrong with what the LLM first generated? What were you able
    to fix it easily? What problems were more difficult to fix?
3.  How did you convince yourself that the implementation was complete
    and accomplished your user stories? Did you use the LLM to help?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Turn-in Instructions¶

Please turn in a single document that contains these parts:

1.  The two user stories that you implemented.
2.  The two (updated) development specifications and mermaid diagrams
    for those user stories as in the Update your Development Specs
    section.
3.  The specification and description of the unified backend
    architecture and its mermaid diagram.
4.  For each module in your backend, provide its specification as in the
    Backend Modules section.
5.  Provide a link to your source code in GitHub
6.  Provide a link to your test code in GitHub
7.  Provide a link to your backend's README in GitHub
8.  A 1-page reflection as in the Reflection section.
9.  Copy-paste logs of all LLM interactions you used during this sprint.
    Identify the name and version of the LLM used.

[] Back to top
