[] CMU 17-316/616: AI Tools for Software Development

Home

Overview

Syllabus

Teamwork Practices

Staff

Assignments

Assignments

-  Reflection 1
-  Reflection 2
-  Reflection 3
-  Reflection 4
-  Reflection 5
-  Reflection 6

Project

Project

Project 1 Requirements Engineering

Project 2 Development Specifications

Project 3 Frontend Development

Project 4 Backend Development

Project 5 Testing

Project 6 Deployment Project 6 Deployment

On This Page

-  Learning Goals
-  Project Context
-  Deliverables
  -  1. Create an AWS account
  -  2. Use AWS Lambda to run your backend code
    -  1. Use the AWS console to experiment with Lambda
    -  2. Package and invoke your Lambda code using the AWS CLI
    -  3. Integrate your Lambda code with the REST API
  -  3. Use API Gateway to create a REST API
  -  4. Host your frontend code
  -  5. Integration testing
  -  6. Automate your integration tests
  -  7. Adopt good GitHub hygiene
  -  8. Use Github actions to automatically deploy on each push to main
    -  Deploying backend code
    -  Deploying frontend code
  -  9. Wrap it up
  -  10. Reflection
-  Turn-in Instructions

Project 7 Final Demo + Postmortem

On This Page

-  Learning Goals
-  Project Context
-  Deliverables
  -  1. Create an AWS account
  -  2. Use AWS Lambda to run your backend code
    -  1. Use the AWS console to experiment with Lambda
    -  2. Package and invoke your Lambda code using the AWS CLI
    -  3. Integrate your Lambda code with the REST API
  -  3. Use API Gateway to create a REST API
  -  4. Host your frontend code
  -  5. Integration testing
  -  6. Automate your integration tests
  -  7. Adopt good GitHub hygiene
  -  8. Use Github actions to automatically deploy on each push to main
    -  Deploying backend code
    -  Deploying frontend code
  -  9. Wrap it up
  -  10. Reflection
-  Turn-in Instructions

Project 6: Deployment¶

Learning Goals¶

- Learn how to package an application for deployment to the cloud.
- Learn how to deploy a frontend and backend application to Amazon Web
  Services (AWS)
- Learn how to automate deployment using GitHub continuous deployment.

Project Context¶

In P1, you defined requirements and user stories. In P2, you expanded
some of those stories into detailed development specifications. In P3,
you implemented two user stories for the front end of your application.
In P4, you implemented two dev specs for the back end of your
application. In P5, you wrote unit tests for two core frontend and two
core backend files/classes. In P6, you will deploy the frontend and
backend of your application to AWS.

By the end of this sprint, you will set up a publicly visible deployment
of your application. You will then automate deployment so that every
time you commit code to your repository, GitHub will run the test cases
and if successful, will deploy the updated application to AWS.

Remember to use the LLMs as much as possible to generate your
deliverables. You may not modify any generated code directly, only by
prompting the LLM. You should use formalized LLM prompts, such as those
we introduced in class. These will make the LLM output more reliable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Deliverables¶

You will begin by setting up your AWS account. You will need AWS access
for all steps of this project.

None of the steps in P6 should cost you any money, however the AWS
account setup will likely require a credit card to be charged in case
you incur any costs. Be assured that whenever we've done this before,
we've spent at most 20-30 cents total. If you find that AWS has billed
you anywhere near USD $1, immediately turn off any applications you have
already deployed and reach out to the instructors for help.

Next, you will set up your application to run with AWS Lambda. AWS
Lambda lets you run server code without having to deal with actual
server machines. It's a "serverless" computing service. You will modify
your backend to run on AWS Lambda.

Your backend should publish its public interfaces via REST API. You will
use AWS API Gateway to expose your public endpoints for web users (or
applications) to interact with.

Next, you will use AWS Amplify to host your frontend application.
Amplify will store and serve static web assets, like HTML, CSS, and JS
files, that comprise your application frontend.

Note

If you are building a VS Code Extension, you will deploy your frontend
to the VS Code Extension Marketplace.

Now is the time to implement integration tests. These are tests that
exercise the frontend to backend (and vice versa) code paths in your
app. You will learn to run these integration tests on localhost and in
the cloud and run them on every checkin.

At the end, you will set up GitHub actions to deploy your frontend code
to Amplify and your backend code to Lambda after each pull request has
been approved.

1. Create an AWS account¶

Go to the AWS Console and create an account. If one person on your team
already has an AWS account, you can use that one. Log into the AWS
Console with your new account.

2. Use AWS Lambda to run your backend code¶

To use Lambda, you will

- Write (slightly stylized) code that executes functions on certain
  events (e.g., the invocation of a given REST endpoint)
- Package up your code (i.e., put it all in a ZIP file)
- Upload the packaged code to AWS

Ask your LLM to modify your backend code so that it executes as a lambda
function. Eventually, that lambda function will execute when your REST
API's public interface endpoints receive post requests. To start with,
though, you should become familiar with Lambda, then package up your
Lambda code, deploy it, and make sure you can invoke it using the AWS
command-line interface (CLI).

1. Use the AWS console to experiment with Lambda¶

Ask your LLM for detailed instructions on how to use AWS Lambda to set
up a dummy application that you can invoke. This will help you get
familiar with AWS Lambda when you have to set up your own application.
If ChatGPT proves unhelpful, read the official AWS documentation.

2. Package and invoke your Lambda code using the AWS CLI¶

Ask your LLM to teach you how to package your Javascript code for
deployment on AWS and upload it with the AWS CLI. If ChatGPT is
unhelpful, you can read the official AWS documentation. There is some
additional documentation in the Lambda section of the official AWS API
Gateway tutorial.

3. Integrate your Lambda code with the REST API¶

Ask your LLM to teach you how to modify the Lambda code so that it is
invoked by requests to your API's public interface functions. If ChatGPT
is not helpful, read the Lambda section of the official AWS API Gateway
tutorial.

3. Use API Gateway to create a REST API¶

AWS API Gateway makes it simple to spin up an API. A web API exposes
endpoints that users (or applications) can interact with. You are going
to create a REST API for the backend of your app that exposes all of
your public interfaces functions.

Ask your LLM to teach you how to create your REST API with AWS API
Gateway. If ChatGPT is unhelpful, read through this tutorial.

After setting up AWS API Gateway, locate the API call logic in your
frontend code (where it currently calls localhost). Replace the
localhost URL with the API Gateway endpoint URL. Note, edit the code
carefully to preserve a version of the app that runs locally for easier
testing.

4. Host your frontend code¶

AWS Amplify makes it easy to e.g., deploy app frontends and integrate
with version control. In this assignment, you will use Amplify to manage
deployment of the frontend of your calculator application.

Your task is to set up Amplify to host the application frontend.

To complete this part of the assignment, refer to the AWS Amplify
tutorial for deploying a web application by connecting Amplify to your
GitHub repository.

If you are building a VS Code Extension, do not follow the AWS Amplify
directions. Instead, you will deploy the frontend of your extension to
the VS Code Extension Marketplace. To complete this deployment, you will
follow these instructions. First, install the vsce command line tool,
create an Azure DevOps personal access token, define your team as a
publisher, and publish your extension. Make sure to say that the cost of
your extension is USD $0.

Be sure to have your LLM do all this work for you!

Note

When this course is over, please remember to unpublish your extension
from the VS Code Extension Marketplace.

5. Integration testing¶

Ask your LLM to write an English-language test specification for the
code pathways that require the execution of frontend and backend code
together. Each specification should contain a list of all functionality
that needs to be tested, followed by a table of tests. Each row of the
table should describe the purpose of the test, the test inputs to the
function, and the test output that is expected if the test passes. You
must write at least one integration test for every code pathway that
spans frontend and backend functionality.

Generate integration tests for each row of your test specification using
your LLM.

Test out your full app on your local machine first. Run your npm scripts
to setup and start the frontend and backend of your application on
localhost, then execute the integration tests with your testing
framework.

Note

Some integrations tests will fail when run on localhost, but work fine
when deployed on the Internet. Please take a note of these and condition
their execution to run only when deployed in the desired environment.

Finally, create a new test configuration that uses the URLs of the
deployed frontend and backend hosted by the AWS Cloud. Rerun your
integration tests on your deployed app and fix any bugs that pop up
until the entire app is working as desired.

6. Automate your integration tests¶

Ask your LLM to create a new GitHub Action that runs your integration
tests on every commit. Store the YAML workflow file in the
.github/workflows directory. Name it run-integration-tests.yml. It
should check out your code, set up the application environment for
frontend and backend (e.g., install Node.js if needed), install
dependencies, and then execute your tests.

1.  For CI instructions to run tests with Jest, check out Dennis
    O'Keefe's blog.
2.  For CI instructions with VS Code extensions, check out these
    instructions.

Check in your YAML file to the GitHub repository.

Ask your LLM to test out your CI code by making a change to one of the
source code files in the frontend and one backend source code file.
Commit the change to Git, push to the remote repository, create a pull
request on GitHub, and accept the pull request. Finally, go to the
GitHub repository on the web and click on the Actions tab on the
navigation bar. You'll see all the workflows on the left and workflow
runs on the right. If you have a green checkmark next to a workflow run,
that means it worked! If there is a red cross, then it did not. Click on
the workflow run to see exactly what got executed in GitHub's "terminal
window" and find out what went wrong. Fix the problem and try again
until each of your two GitHub actions run successfully.

7. Adopt good GitHub hygiene¶

Git is a very powerful and flexible version control system. One best
practice you will follow is to create a new feature branch whenever you
start working on a new coding task. Never work directly on the main
branch. When your feature is done and your CI GitHub Actions (unit tests
and integration tests) have passed their tests, create a pull request on
GitHub to push the changes from the feature branch to main.

As configured by default, anyone with access to your repo can push
whatever garbage they want to the main branch. That's not good! It's
important to make sure code that actually gets deployed has been
thoroughly tested and reviewed (to catch everything from mistakes to
intentional back doors!). In this assignment, you must block merges to
main until your code is reviewed and passes CI.

To protect your main branch, navigate to the Settings tab in your GitHub
repo and click on Branches (on the lefthand side). You'll see two
options: (1) Add branch ruleset and (2) Add classic branch protection
rule. Add a classic branch protection rule that protects main from
direct, unreviewed commits: first check the box to require a pull
request before merging and second check the box to require status checks
to pass before merging. Select your CI testing workflows here as the
relevant status checks. Finally,

8. Use Github actions to automatically deploy on each push to main¶

After getting hands on experience with each service, you will use a
Github action to deploy updates automatically on each push to your main
branch.

The CD pipeline will perform the following tasks:

- Deploy the packaged backend Lambda code.
- Redeploy the frontend (to Amplify or the VS Code Extension
  Marketplace).

In order to do this, you will need to allow Github to authenticate to
AWS. Follow the Github documentation to safely use your AWS secrets in
CD. This AWS blog post describes some (basic) best practices for
generating and handling AWS authentication secrets in CI; navigate to
the "Configuring AWS credentials in GitHub" section of the tutorial.

Deploying backend code¶

Your LLM should create a Github workflow named deploy-aws-lambda.yml
that takes the follow steps:

- Checks out the code, sets up Node, and installs dependencies.
- Packages the code for lambda deployment.
- Uses the AWS CLI to update the lambda code (giving the CLI access to
  your authentication secret and AWS region through the environment).

Deploying frontend code¶

Your LLM should create a Github workflow named deploy-aws-amplify.yml
that takes the following steps:

- Checks out the code, sets up Node, and builds the code.
- Triggers AWS Amplify to redeploy the latest frontend version from your
  repository. See the AWS documentation for more.

If you are publishing a VS Code Extension, your workflow will be named
deploy-extension.yml. It should simply package up your extension and
publish it to the marketplace.

9. Wrap it up¶

Edit the README.md file for your project.

1.  Provide instructions for web users of your app to run your
    application.
2.  Provide all the instructions needed for a random person on the
    Internet who forks your codebase to set up AWS to deploy your
    application.

10. Reflection¶

Without your LLM, write a 500-word (i.e., one-page) reflection on:

1.  How effective was the LLM in helping you understand how to deploy
    your app? What did you like about it? What was wrong with it? How
    many times did you have to change your prompt to get it to explain
    the information in a way you could understand?
2.  How difficult was it to change habits and stop committing directly
    to main? Did you have to ask your team to change their practices to
    ensure minimal delays for accepting your pull requests? How do you
    feel about this feature branch practice? What are the pros and cons?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Turn-in Instructions¶

Please turn in a single document that contains these parts:

1.  Deploy your app. Keep it deployed until the instructors let you know
    that they've checked this part out.
    1.  Provide a link to your Amplify frontend deployment or VS Code
        Extension Marketplace extension URL.
    2.  Provide a link to your Lambda backend REST function.
2.  The integration test specification.
3.  Provide a Git repository link to the test code files that implement
    your integration test specs.
4.  Copy-paste in the test output from running your integration tests on
    localhost.
5.  Copy-paste in the test output from running your integration tests in
    the cloud.
6.  Provide a Git repository link to your run-integration-tests.yml
    file.
7.  Provide a Git repository link to your deploy-aws-amplify.yml file
    (or deploy-extension.yml as appropriate).
8.  Provide a Git repository link to your deploy-aws-lambda.yml file.
9.  Provide a link to your project's README in GitHub.
10. A 1-page reflection as in the Reflection section.
11. Copy-paste logs of all LLM interactions you used during this sprint.
    Identify the name and version of the LLM used.

[] Back to top
