[] CMU 17-316/616: AI Tools for Software Development

Home

Overview

Syllabus Syllabus

On This Page

-  Course Description
-  Logistics and Communication
  -  Lectures
  -  Prerequisites
  -  Readings
  -  Communication
-  Grading
-  Course Policies
  -  Teamwork
  -  Late Work
  -  Time Management
  -  Writing
  -  Use of AI
  -  Academic Honesty and Collaboration
-  Disability accomodations
-  A Note on Self-Care

Teamwork Practices

Staff

Assignments

Assignments

-  Reflection 1
-  Reflection 2
-  Reflection 3
-  Reflection 4
-  Reflection 5
-  Reflection 6

Project

Project

-  Project 1 Requirements Engineering
-  Project 2 Development Specifications
-  Project 3 Frontend Development
-  Project 4 Backend Development
-  Project 5 Testing
-  Project 6 Deployment
-  Project 7 Final Demo + Postmortem

On This Page

-  Course Description
-  Logistics and Communication
  -  Lectures
  -  Prerequisites
  -  Readings
  -  Communication
-  Grading
-  Course Policies
  -  Teamwork
  -  Late Work
  -  Time Management
  -  Writing
  -  Use of AI
  -  Academic Honesty and Collaboration
-  Disability accomodations
-  A Note on Self-Care

Syllabus

Course Description¶

Students will learn how to use AI-based developer tools across the
software development lifecycle, for example in coding, code reviewing,
project management, automated testing, and security. The course will
require significant software development practice, both with and without
AI tools. Students will use their experiences to analyze the impact of
AI tools on software productivity across individuals, teams, and
organizations. Students will be expected to code in scripting languages
(e.g., Python and JavaScript), set up development environments, read
documentation, and learn new libraries and frameworks.

Logistics and Communication¶

Lectures¶

- Monday @ 11:00am - 12:20pm (PH 226B)
- Wednesday @ 11:00am - 12:20pm (PH 226B)

Prerequisites¶

There are no prerequisites. (Although we expect experience with Python,
setting up development environments, reading documentation, and learning
new libraries.)

Readings¶

We will be reading a selection of online sources that will be provided.

Communication¶

The course uses Canvas for grading, announcements, and supplementary
documents. Discussion and questions will be managed on Slack. Slides,
assignments and the schedule will be posted on this website. We use
GitHub to coordinate group work. We will provide private GitHub
repositories for individuals and groups.

Please use Slack for discussion and questions, including clarifying
assignments. If you need to write to Prof. Begel and/or Prof. Henley
about the class, you must include both faculty members on the message,
otherwise we will reject your message and ask you to resend to both of
us. We prefer you write us on Slack instead of email.

The instructors hold weekly office hours. If you cannot make it to
office hours, contact us via Slack and we will find an alternative time
to meet.

If you have a question or concern unsuitable for Slack, contact both of
the instructors via email: Andrew Begel and Austin Henley. Unless the
subject matter is sensitive, all questions will be conveyed to all
instructors before being answered, so there's no point in emailing just
one of us.

For sensitive matters, of course, feel free to contact us individually.

Grading¶

Evaluation will be based on the following approximate distribution: 46%
in-class activities, 42% course project, and 12% homework essays.

Note: Attendance is required for guest lectures. Absences during guest
lectures (without previously arranged accommodations) will result in a
deduction in your overall course grade.

Course Policies¶

Teamwork¶

Teamwork is an essential part of this course. Teams of 2-3 students will
be assigned by the instructors to work on the course project as well as
in-class activities. Some assignments will be graded as a team, although
we reserve the right to override these grades or to institute peer
grading in problematic situations, as detailed in the Team Policy.

Late Work¶

Due to the participatory nature of the course (in-class activities and
team projects), late work is generally not accepted. However, we may
allow replacing a missed activity with additional work on a case by case
basis for partial credit.

Time Management¶

This is a 12-unit course. It is our intention to manage it so that you
spend close to 12 hours a week on the course, on average. In general, 4
hours/week will be spent in class, and 8 hours on assignments. A key
challenge in software engineering is that there is never enough time to
implement everything that you want to implement; it is therefore
important that you practice time management, estimation, and task
prioritization. We would rather you make well-justified decisions to not
do something than spend tens of hours on your homework.

Note that most homework is done in groups, so please account for the
overhead and decreased time flexibility that entails.

Feel free to give the course staff feedback on how much time the course
is taking for you. This is especially relevant as we teach this course
for the first time!

Writing¶

Describing tradeoffs, justifying decisions, and communicating
effectively in a software team are key learning goals of this course.
Assignments will include discussing issues in written form, reflecting
on experiences, and presenting them to the class. The Student Academic
Success Center offers one-on-one writing help for students, along with
workshops. The instructors are also happy to provide additional guidance
if requested.

Use of AI¶

The focus of the course is to use AI for all aspects of software
development. As such, it is expected that much of the artifacts you
produce will come in part from AI and that the process you follow to
complete assignments will also be facilitated with AI.

However, you are still responsible for what you submit and accomplish
with AI. We do not allow AI to be used for the writing of the reflection
assignments. These are to be completed without AI assistance of any kind
(based on your experience from using the AI tools).

Academic Honesty and Collaboration¶

The University Policy on Academic Integrity applies. Most assignments
are done in groups. Our expectations regarding academic honesty and
collaboration for group work are the same as for individual work,
elevated to the level of "group." Group members will collaborate with
one another, but groups should work independently from one another, not
exchanging code with other groups. Within groups, we expect that you are
honest about your contribution to the group's work. This implies not
taking credit for others' work and not covering for team members that
have not contributed to the team.

The course also includes individual assignments and individual
components of group assignments. Although your solutions for individual
parts may be based on the content produced for the group component
(e.g., written reflections), we expect you to complete individual
components independently of your groupmates.

Regarding the internet, StackOverflow, and similar sources: In
real-world development, engineers often adapt code from Q&A sites, open
source repositories, or similar sources to new ends. This is acceptable
in this course, with two caveats:

- You may not copy a solution for our homework assignments specifically
  from another student or group, even if, for some reason, that code is
  available openly on GitHub or elsewhere (see below on the importance
  of keeping your homework code).
- You must test all of your code, and those tests must pass. That is,
  you must understand any code you adapt from the internet, and you must
  demonstrate that understanding using unit tests.

Regarding solutions from other students in the course, we reuse the
Collaboration Policy from 15-214, with minor modifications:

"You may not copy any part of a solution to a problem that was written
by another student, or was developed together with another student. You
may not look at another student's solution, even if you have completed
your own, nor may you knowingly give your solution to another student or
leave your solution where another student can see it. Here are some
examples of behavior that are inappropriate:

Copying or retyping, or referring to, files or parts of files (such as
source code, written text, or unit tests) from another person (whether
in final or draft form, regardless of the permissions set on the
associated files) while producing your own. This is true even if your
version includes minor modifications such as style or variable name
changes or minor logic modifications.

Getting help that you do not fully understand, and from someone whom you
do not acknowledge on your solution.

Writing, using, or submitting a program that attempts to alter or erase
grading information or otherwise compromise security of course resources

Lying to course staff.

Giving copies of work to others, or allowing someone else to copy or
refer to your code or written assignment to produce their own, either in
draft or final form. This includes making your work publicly available
in a way that other students (current or future) can access your
solutions, even if others' access is accidental or incidental to your
goals. Beware the privacy settings on your open source accounts!

Coaching others step-by-step without them understanding your help.

If any of your work contains any statement that was not written by you,
you must put it in quotes and cite the source. If you are paraphrasing
an idea you read elsewhere, you must acknowledge the source. Using
existing material without proper citation is plagiarism, a form of
cheating. If there is any question about whether the material is
permitted, you must get permission in advance. We will be using
automated systems to detect software plagiarism.

It is not considered cheating to clarify vague points in the
assignments, lectures, lecture notes; to give help or receive help in
using the computer systems, compilers, debuggers, profilers, or other
facilities; or to discuss ideas at a high level, without referring to or
producing code.

Any violation of this policy is cheating. The minimum penalty for
cheating (including plagiarism) will be a zero grade for the whole
assignment. Cheating incidents will also be reported through University
channels, with possible additional disciplinary action (see the
above-linked University Policy on Academic Integrity).

If you have any question about how this policy applies in a particular
situation, ask the instructors or TAs for clarification."

Note that the instructors respect honesty in these (and indeed most!)
situations.

Disability accomodations¶

If you have a disability and have an accommodations letter from the
Disability Resources office, I encourage you to discuss your
accommodations and needs with me as early in the semester as possible. I
will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as
appropriate. If you suspect that you may have a disability and would
benefit from accommodations but are not yet registered with the Office
of Disability Resources, I encourage you to contact them at
access@andrew.cmu.edu.

A Note on Self-Care¶

All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not
alone. Besides the instructors, who are here to help you succeed, there
are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of
the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for
support sooner rather than later is often helpful.

If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult
life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly
encourage you to seek support. Counseling and Psychological Services
(CaPS) is here to help: call 412-268-2922 and visit their website.
Consider reaching out to a friend, faculty or family member you trust
for help getting connected to the support that can help.

[] Back to top
