CSE 403 project: Project proposal

Overview

1.  Develop an exciting product idea with one or two other students. As
    you develop your vision, think about who is your customer, what is
    the problem you are trying to solve, and what is your solution. The
    project should be appropriate for a 6-person CSE 403 team to
    complete in 8 weeks.
2.  Write a 1-2 page proposal document.
3.  Prepare a 4-slide slideshow, and present it to the whole class.
4.  View other students’ proposals and rank them (including your own) by
    which project you would prefer to work on. Also indicate your
    preferred teammates.
5.  The staff will use these rankings to organize project teams, taking
    into account project and teammate preferences.

Setup

Select one or two other students to work together with you on a
proposal. You can leverage the class Ed discussion board to find a
partner, as well as attend section on Tuesday where the staff will help
form partnerships. If you don’t have a partner after section on Tuesday,
contact the 403 staff immediately so we can help connect you with
another student. Signup your group on the Proposal group signup sheet
(see Calendar) by Tues 1/6/2026, 11:59pm.

Create your pitch

First, develop an interesting product idea. You want to convince a
venture capitalist that your product is worth funding, as well as
convince other software engineers that they should sign up to build it
with you. Do not make grandiose or unsubstantiated claims; be practical
and factual.

1. Write a 2 page proposal (PDF)

Here is information that you should include in your document.

- Title: Start with a short and catchy project title and your full names
  and UW NetIDs.
- Abstract: The first paragraph of your document must be an abstract (or
  executive summary, or TL;DR) that explains your project at a high
  level. If someone reads nothing but that one paragraph, what do you
  want them to know?
- Problem statement: What are you trying to do? For example, who are
  your target customers, what problem will your product help them with?
- Current practice: How is the task/problem solved today, and what are
  the limits of current practice?
- Your solution: How will your product solve the problem? What is new in
  your approach and why do you think it will be more successful than
  other approaches? Try not to reinvent the wheel or reimplement
  something that already exists, unless your approach is different.
- Impact: Who cares? If you are successful, what difference will it
  make?
- Technical approach: Briefly describe your proposed technical approach.
  This may include what system architecture, technologies, and tools you
  may use.
- Risks: What is the single most serious challenge or risk you foresee
  with developing your product on time? How will you minimize or
  mitigate the risk? Don’t state generic risks that would be equally
  applicable to any project, like “we might run out of time”.

2. Create a 4-page slideshow presentation (PDF)

- Present your project idea at a higher level compared to your proposal
  document.
- Start with your project name and your full names with your UW NetIDs.
- Focus on the essentials. You have very little time, so don’t dive deep
  into technical details.
- Remember you have two goals: to convince the venture capitalists (the
  CSE 403 staff) to approve the project, and to attract software
  developers (other CSE 403 students) to join the project. Don’t include
  details that do not pertain to those two goals.
  Structure of the slide deck:
- Your slide deck must have exactly 4 content slides, including the
  title slide.
- The first slide should start with the project title and your full
  names and UW NetIDs. It may or may not contain other content.
- Your slides must include at least one diagram or figure. Some examples
  of possible diagrams or figures are: A mockup of a GUI, an
  architectural diagram indicating the proposed components of the
  system, an illustration of the problem being solved, a GUI,
  architectural diagram, etc. of a competing product that highlights
  deficiencies that you will address.

3. Submit to Canvas.

- Add your names to a Canvas "Proposal groups". One group member should
  submit your files.
- You will submit two PDF documents to Canvas.
- Name your proposal document [projectname]_[last name]_[last name].pdf.
- Name your slide deck [projectname]_[last name]_[last name]_slides.pdf.
- If your slide deck has animation, please also submit the slides
  version.

Sign up for a presentation slot

- The CSE403 staff will be putting together the schedule. Stay tuned.

Present your proposal, and listen to other proposals

- The proposals will be presented in class (see the Calendar).
- All proposal members must participate in your presentation.
- You will have about 3 minutes. The staff will cut you off at that time
  if you have not finished. Practice your delivery beforehand to ensure
  it fits the time!
- You will have time at the end of class to reach out to other members
  of the class for clarifications and/or to organize into a group.

Rank your preferences

- A link to the proposals will be provided for your review. You may find
  it helpful to read some or all of the abstracts. You may want to reach
  out to members of the class (e.g., after class or on the Ed message
  board) for clarifications and discussions.
- Rank project pitches by which project you would prefer to work on. You
  can, but do not have to, include your own project as one you want to
  work on.
- You must fill all the blanks in the ranking. That is, you will have a
  #1 choice, and a #2 choice, etc. Do not list just your two or three
  most preferred projects, as they may not be the projects selected to
  move forward.
- Don’t choose a project that you do not have the resources to complete.
  For example, don’t choose an iOS app if you don’t have a Mac and an
  iPhone. Don’t choose an Android app if you don’t have an Android
  phone.
- You may request your preferred teammates. This must be a mutual
  request, in other words, preferred teammates must request you.
- Finally, each student must individually fill out and submit the form
  of project and team preferences. Full instructions are in the form.
  Due by Thurs 1/15/26 by 11:59pm.

FAQ

Will my grade depend on whether my project is chosen?

- No. Your grade is not based upon whether your project is chosen (by
  other students or by the 403 staff) to be implemented. Rather, your
  grade is based on the quality of your materials and your presentation.
  We will be evaluating whether you have addressed the identified
  project elements, made reasonable judgments concerning them, and
  organized and pitched your proposal well.

Do I have to work on the project that I proposed?

- No. Your ranking does not have to include your own pitch, if you are
  more excited about other teams’ ideas. Also, you do not need to work
  with your proposal partner.

How many people can work together on a project?

- We will aim for groups of 5-6 students per project. If a project
  proposal is particularly popular, it is possible that more than one
  group can work on the same project idea – with a different focus or
  technical approach.

How will you create the project groups?

- We will try to give you one of your top project choices, based on your
  project ranking.
- If a set of students submitted identical group members and project
  preferences, we will try to keep those students together.
- We will select projects that we believe will be a good fit for the
  class (scope, resources, etc.), and for which students are interested
  in developing.
- We will avoid assigning you a project that we think will not be
  successful in the class, based on our experience.

How should I describe current practice?

- You should spend nearly as much time understanding what already exists
  as you do coming up with something new. For example, don’t propose to
  develop a web search engine without knowing that Google exists. You
  could propose, however, some search engine features that you believe
  would be useful and that Google doesn’t provide.
- Clearly explain what differentiates your project from the
  alternatives. Differentiate the top-level objectives, target
  customers, scope, and technical approach of your product from
  existing, alternative products. Indicate what is novel about your
  proposed features. Don’t belabor features that are standard in
  existing packages.
- Also, indicate how the proposed project poses interesting design (or
  other) challenges from a software engineering point of view.

Any advice regarding writing and presentation?

Excellent question! Here are some tips:

- Clearly motivate the need for your product. Who are your customers and
  what problem are you solving for them?
- Be specific and give examples – whether you are explaining a problem
  or a solution.
- Include mockups if you are proposing a system with a GUI.
- Make your slides simple and readable. Make sure your fonts are large
  enough to be easily read from the back of the room; there is
  sufficient contrast between the text and background color; and the
  slides are free of distracting design elements (such as background
  images or slide template graphics).
- Put the take-home points on the slides, in telegraphic form (no full
  sentences). You can use these as memory joggers during the
  presentation. Your live presentation should go beyond what’s on the
  slides (instead of reading the slides, expand on the points) - keep
  your slides simple and readable.
- Use color effectively, but be aware that some people do not see the
  full color spectrum. Highlight the key points to draw the reader’s eye
  and indicate what really matters about the slide. Use similar colors
  for related things.
