CSE 403 project: Architecture and design

Overview

Solidify the software architecture and design of your product.

Setup

Work with your project team to revise and extend your project document.

Instructions

Add three new sections to your project document (Software architecture,
Software design, and Coding guidelines) and revise the process
description section. Additionally, incorporate the feedback that you
have already received.

1. Software architecture (40%)

Provide an overview of your system. Specifically:

- Identify and describe the major software components and their
  functionality at a conceptual level.

- Specify the interfaces between components.

- Describe in detail what data your system stores, and how. If it uses a
  database, give the high level database schema. If not, describe how
  you are storing the data and its organization.

- If there are particular assumptions underpinning your chosen
  architecture, identify and describe them.

- For each of two decisions pertaining to your software architecture,
  identify and briefly describe an alternative. For each of the two
  alternatives, discuss its pros and cons compared to your choice.

- Use at least one diagram in your description to enhance clarity.

2. Software design (30%)

Provide a detailed definition of each of the software components you
identified above.

- What packages, classes, or other units of abstraction form these
  components?

- What are the responsibilities of each of those parts of a component?

- Use at minimum one diagram in your description to enhance clarity.

3. Coding guidelines (10%)

For each programming language that you will use in the implementation of
your project, provide a link to a pre-existing coding style guideline
that the members of your project will follow. Do not try to make up your
own guidelines. Briefly state why you chose those guidelines and how you
plan to enforce them.

4. Process description (20%)

Update your process description to address the following five topics:

i. Risk assessment

Update your risk assessment to now identify five risks to successful
completion of your project. Provide this information in a table format,
for easy reference and tracking over the lifetime of your project.

For each, give:

- Likelihood of occurring (high, medium, low);
- Impact if it occurs (high, medium, low);
- Evidence upon which you base your estimates, such as what information
  you have already gathered or what experiments you have done;
- Steps you are taking to reduce the likelihood or impact, and steps to
  permit better estimates;
- Plan for detecting the problem (trivial example: running automated
  tests to determine that a file format has changed);
- Mitigation plan should it occur.

ii. Project schedule

Update your preliminary schedule to identify external and internal
milestones with associated tasks and target completion dates. Consider
effort required, dependencies, integration, and testing needs. (What has
to be complete before you can begin implementing component X? What has
to be complete before you can start testing component X? What has to be
complete before you can run an entire (small) use case?)

Tip: To build a schedule, start with your major milestones (tend to be
nouns - deliverables) and fill in the tasks (tend to start with a verb -
actions) that will allow you to achieve them. A simple three column
table is sufficient for this size of a project: Milestone, major tasks
to achieve it, target date (or week).

If you are using an agile software development lifecycle, a high level
schedule is still important to ensure you’re on track for delivery this
quarter. Milestones with target delivery dates provide clarity on
minimal progress that must be made in order to deliver at the end of
quarter. Essential tasks for each milestone give you a headstart on the
backlog.

The schedule should focus on delivering your major features and address
when you will assess delivery of stretch features.

iii. Team structure

Update your team structure, if necessary, and provide more details about
team organization and team members’ roles and responsibilities.

iv. Test plan & bugs (new)

Describe what aspects of your system you plan to test and why they are
sufficient, as well as how specifically you plan to test those aspects
in a disciplined way. Describe a strategy for each of unit testing,
system (integration) testing, and usability testing, along with any
specific test suites identified to capture the requirements.

We require that you use GitHub Issues to track bugs that occur during
use and testing.

v. Documentation plan (new)

Outline a plan for developing documentation that you plan to deliver
with the system, e.g., user guides, admin guides, developer guides, man
pages, help menus, wikis, etc.

Balance the agile philosophy of working software over comprehensive
documentation against the need to have your customer understand how to
use the system and others to contribute to and sustain it over time.

Submit

1.  Export a PDF snapshot of your project document named [project
    name]_m3.pdf and submit it to Canvas.
2.  Individually complete the form individual-status-and-contribution,
    provided by your TA. This is a required part of each group milestone
    assignment and contributes to your individual grade.

Clarifications

What principles should our software architecture and design follow?

- Strive for modularity and testability.
- Use encapsulation.
- Keep related data and behavior in the same place.
- Emphasize cohesion, limit coupling, and do not pollute public
  interfaces.
- Emphasize separation of concerns: avoid “god classes” that do too
  much.
- Avoid overengineering and complexity: avoid insignificant or
  irrelevant classes that do too little.
- Make sure you can describe the purpose and functionality of each class
  concisely and clearly.
- Keep the data model decoupled from the UI (view).
- Allow for features to be developed in parallel as much as possible.

Any other writing hints?

In evaluating your work, we will check whether your project document:

- addresses all the necessary elements of defining the architecture and
  design of your system,
- provides reasonable justifications for decisions made,
- provides a reasonable schedule, and
- shows general improvements, in particular to the process section.

Be concise. Your project document should address the required points
briefly and clearly. The staff will deduct points for overly long,
poorly organized, or poorly explained documents.

Do not include content-free filler in your living document. This
includes anything that could appear in identical form in another group’s
materials. For example, don’t merely state as a risk, “we might fall
behind schedule” (another example is “we don’t know the tools”). What
factors do you think are most likely to cause schedule slippage for your
project? Why do you think those are the parts of the schedule with the
greatest potential variance? What have you done, or what do you plan to
do, to learn more about how long those particular tasks will really
take?

Your project document should clearly describe (and possibly visualize)
the system architecture. For example, if you are using the
Model-View-Controller architecture, your living document should make
this clear and provide references to the design section, which in turn
clearly describes which classes implement the model, the view, and the
controller of your system.

Diagrams can be powerful visual tools to explain architecture and design
and should be used.

Avoid duplicated information and make good use of cross-references.

Can we use AI for this assignment?

No. Please see the AI policy in the course syllabus.
