CSE 403 project: Beta release

Overview

Solidify your toolchain and processes, implement the first version of
your system’s core components, and demo at least one major use case of
your product.

Instructions

1. Solidify your toolchain, processes, and instructions (40%)

- All technical processes (version control, bug tracking, build system,
  testing and CI) must be functioning and documented. We expect a
  code-coverage tool to be part of your CI flow.

- Your GitHub repository must provide a top-level README with:

  - Clearly labeled instructions for how to build and test the system.
    Strive for a high degree of automation.
  - Clearly labeled instructions for how to run the system.
  - A GitHub tag (id) for this release. This is an identifier to use to
    on a “git checkout” to get the commits that comprise the beta
    release of your software. See: Git-Basics-Tagging.

- Based on the provided instructions, the course staff must be able to
  build and test the system without issues.

Complete this in the main branch of your repository by due date.

2. Implement and integrate first versions of all your system’s major components (40%)

- Implement and demo a first release of working software. At least one
  major use case that touches all major components of your system must
  be operational. For example, in the case of a client-server web
  application, a user command invoked from the front end should be able
  to return data from the back end.

- The top-level README in your repository must reflect which use case(s)
  are operational. You do not need to have all features implemented but
  at least one core feature/core use case should be minimally
  operational to show that the basic components of your system are
  implemented, integrated, and working.

- We expect proper use of version control, including coherent commits
  with descriptive commit messages. We expect proper use of pull
  requests and constructive code reviews.

Complete this in the main branch of your repository by due date.

3. Present your demo and reflection (20%)

- The presentations will take place in class, and you have a maximum of
  9 minutes in total. This includes time for taking questions.

- See the instructions for a demo presentation for tips. However,
  because of the short time available, focus on #1-#3 in that list: the
  introductory slides, the demo itself, and a short discussion of any
  challenges and learnings to date and your plans forward.

- You will present your slides and do your demo from your own laptop.
  However, you will not plug your laptop into a projector, because that
  takes too long. Instead you will connect to a Zoom link and show your
  demo by sharing your screen.

Submit

1.  Export a PDF snapshot of your slide deck named [project name]_m5.pdf
    and submit it to Canvas.
2.  Individually complete the form individual-status-and-contribution,
    provided by your TA. This is a required part of each group milestone
    assignment and contributes to your individual grade.
