CSE 403 project: Gamma release

Overview

Make progress on the implementation of your product and solidify the
documentation for end-users and developers.

Set up

Work with your project team to (1) make progress towards the final
release and illustrate that progress through a video demo, (2) provide
concise user and (3) developer documentation.

Instructions

1. Make progress in your GitHub repository (40%)

This section of the assignment will be graded individually. Some
requirements:

- Each team member must contribute to the code base.

- Each team member must demonstrate proper use of version control and
  CI.

- Each team members' contributions (commit/pull request) must be tested,
  commented, and code reviewed.

- Each team member must be a code reviewer on some pull requests, and
  respond to comments on their pull requests.

- Provide a GitHub tag (id) for this Gamma release (including
  documentation) and include it in your ReadMe. Make sure the last
  commit in this version is inside the due date timeline.

  Complete this in the main branch of your repository.

2. Provide a demo of the feature advances (10%)

Create a short (3 minute) video demonstrating (1) one (or more) feature
of your product that has advanced since the Beta release; (2) a
successful run of your continuous integration process: trigger a build
and test. Slides are not required.

3. Write user documentation (25%)

Your repository must contain a user manual. Anyone looking at your
repository should be able to easily find the user manual. The user
manual is focused solely on end-users of your product.

The user manual should describe the functionality of your project as you
expect it to be at the end of the quarter. For this assignment, indicate
missing functionality as work in progress.

The manual should include the following information:

- A high-level description. What does the system do and why would a user
  want to use it.

- How to install the software (if applicable). If your system has
  prerequisites (e.g., tools, libraries, emulators, third-party
  applications, etc.), your instructions should list all of them and
  indicate how to install and configure them. Make sure to indicate what
  specific version requirements these prerequisites must satisfy. If
  running the system requires the installation of, e.g., a virtual
  machine, a database, or an emulator, make sure to provide clear
  step-by-step instructions.

- How to run the software. How to start up the system (e.g., a getting
  started guide)? Are there mobile device or browser requirements?

- How to use the software. How does the user use the main features? You
  can assume that your user is familiar with your particular platform
  (e.g., use of a web browser, desktop applications, or mobile
  applications). For missing functionality, your documentation should
  simply indicate that this functionality is work in progress.

- How to report a bug. This should include not just the mechanics (a
  pointer to your issue tracker), but also what information is needed.
  You can set up a bug-report template in your issue tracker, or you can
  reference a resource about how to write a good bug report. Here is an
  example for bug reporting guidelines.

- Known bugs. Known bugs or limitations should be documented in the bug
  tracker. A user testing the implemented use case(s) should not
  encounter trivial bugs or a large number of bugs that are unlisted in
  your bug tracker.

  Complete this in the main branch of your repository.

3. Developer documentation (25%)

Your GitHub repository must contain developer guidelines. Anyone looking
at your repository should be able to easily find these guidelines. The
developer guidelines are focused solely on people who want to contribute
to your project.

The developer documentation should include at least the following
information:

- How to obtain the source code. If your system uses multiple
  repositories or submodules, provide clear instructions for how to
  obtain all relevant sources.

- The layout of your directory structure. What do the various
  directories (folders) contain, and where to find source files, tests,
  documentation, data files, etc.

- How to build the software. Provide clear instructions for how to use
  your project’s build system to build all system components.

- How to test the software. Provide clear instructions for how to run
  the system’s test cases. In some cases, the instructions may need to
  include information such as how to access data sources or how to
  interact with external systems. You may reference the user
  documentation (e.g., prerequisites) to avoid duplication.

- How to add new tests. Are there any naming conventions/patterns to
  follow when naming test files? Is there a particular test harness to
  use?

- How to build a release of the software. Describe any tasks that are
  not automated. For example, should a developer update a version number
  (in code and documentation) prior to invoking the build system? Are
  there any sanity checks a developer should perform after building a
  release?

  Complete this in the main branch of your repository.

Submit

1.  Export the video of your demo (max size: 500 MB) and submit it to
    Canvas.
2.  Individually complete the form individual-status-and-contribution,
    provided by your TA. This is a required part of each group milestone
    assignment and contributes to your individual grade.

If your video file exceeds 500 MB, reduce the resolution and re-export
the video before submitting. Be sure that the video remains clear and
fully comprehensible, and that the demo is still easy to see and follow
after compression.

Clarifications

- Can we use AI for this milestone? You can use AI tools only for coding
  pieces of the milestone, as outlined in the AI policy in the course
  syllabus. You may not use AI, for example, for the user or developer
  documentation.

- Can you explain what is meant by “user”? Think of the user as someone
  to whom you might sell or license or provide-access-to your product.
  They will want to understand what it does, how to install it (if
  applicable), how to use it including what features are present and
  future, and how to file bugs against it. Will you have multiple types
  of users? For example,for a chat-board product, type1-user might be an
  IT professional who wants to install a local version for their
  organization, and type2-user might be an employee who will use the
  local chat-board. If your product can only be used through your
  universal central service, you may only have type2-users.

- Should these documents read like essays? No. Your audience is
  generally professionals and software developers like yourselves. While
  you may want to write short paragraphs for the overview and section
  introductions, we recommend you use lists and tables for instructions.
  These are easier and faster for your stakeholders to follow.

- What if info needed in my user or developer documentation already
  exists in my project document? The documentation in your repository
  should be largely self-contained, and anyone looking for documentation
  should find it, or a link to it, in the repository. You may link to
  sections of your project document from your user/developer
  documentation, or you may move these sections to the repository and
  put a link to it in your living document. Do not maintain two parallel
  versions of any documentation.
