CSE 403 project: Peer project review

Overview

Peer-review another team’s project and provide suggestions for
improvements. This helps the other team by providing a fresh perspective
and giving them outside feedback. It also helps you and your team: you
will see how another team is approaching a problem, which can give you
ideas of what to do or what to avoid. We expect all team members to
participate in this review.

Setup

As a team, peer-review the project assigned to your team for review. To
find the project to review, open this milestone assignment in Canvas and
find the project name associated with your team in the table.
Immediately contact that team to get access to their GitHub repo for
each of your team members. If their repo is private, you will need to
provide your GitHub usernames to them.

Provide access to your repo to the students peer reviewing your project.
Access is required by Wed 11:59pm so the students can get started on
their review. Also provide any keys the students may need to build and
run your system. They may benefit from seeing your Gamma video.

We encourage you to book some extra team meetings so you can do the
review in real time with each other, to discuss your experiences and
feedback.

Instructions

1. Review your assigned project and file issues for any encountered problems

- Read the developer guidelines, then build and test the product.
- Read the user documentation, then run the product.
- If you are blocked while trying to do these things, open an issue
  immediately indicating that you are blocked. If another team opens
  such an issue on your repository, resolve it immediately.
- You should open other issues as appropriate.
- You may open a pull request with suggested improvements if you see how
  to resolve an issue that you raised.

2. Write and submit a review

You will submit a single document, consisting of the review list below,
your experience, and issue URLs for any bugs, improvements, general
feedback encountered. While we expect you to review the project as a
team, we will be looking for evidence that every team member has engaged
equally, and we require each team member to write up at least one
bug/issue/feedback item discussed in the tracker or an update with a
pull-request.

Review list including notes on experience and URLs (50%)

Developer guidelines

- There are developer guidelines, which I could easily find in the
  repository.
- The developer guidelines are self-contained and well structured.
- The description of the repository structure is clear and makes sense
  to me.
- The instructions for how to add a new test case are clear and make
  sense to me.
- I could build the software, following the provided instructions, on a
  machine matching the prerequisites mentioned in the instructions.
- I could test the software, following the provided instructions.
- The continuous integration (CI) setup makes sense to me, and I could
  find the build history.

User manual

- There is a user manual, which I could easily find in the repository.
- The high-level description of the system is clear.
- The user manual is self-contained, well structured, and comprehensive.
- The user manual contains all instructions required to use the system.
- I could install the software, following the provided instructions.
- I could run the software, following the provided instructions.
- I could use the software, executing the functionality described in the
  manual.
- The instructions for filing a bug report are clear and sufficient.

Provide your review results in your document under the heading, Review
List. For any item in this list that you do not agree with or that could
be improved, open an issue in their repository. Use a table to format
your results, with columns: review item, experience, issue title, issue
url.

Feedback (50%)

After completing the review checklist, add a section of high-level
feedback and constructive criticism focusing on their implementation,
descriptive writing, or technical setup. Create issues for your major
points of feedback. Also open one issue with praise: point out aspects
of their project that you appreciated or found to be well-done. Provide
the issue URLs, with their titles, in your document under the heading,
Feedback.

The final document will be shared with the team whose project you are
evaluating, for their reference as well as the entries you filed in
their issue tracker.

Submit

1.  Submit this review as a document to Canvas by due date. Include your
    names as well as the name of the project that you are reviewing. The
    document should include the review list and feedback with
    corresponding titles of issues or pull requests and their URLs in
    the GitHub issue tracker. The major content should be found in the
    issue tracker.
2.  Individually complete the form individual-status-and-contribution,
    provided by your TA. This is a required part of each group milestone
    assignment and contributes to your individual grade.

Clarifications

Can we use AI for this milestone?

You can use AI tools only for the coding (such as an AI code review of
project source code) pieces of the milestone, as outlined in the AI
policy in the course syllabus.

What if I need to file an issue but there are no instructions provided for how to do so, or the instructions are unclear?

In this case, still open an issue on GitHub and, additionally, explain
why the instructions are insufficient in your review.

How would I provide a pull request to fix an issue?

Pull requests are optional. If you choose to make a pull request, here
are instructions:

1.  Open the repository of the reviewed system on GitHub.
2.  Click “Fork”, which will create a clone of the repository under your
    account.
3.  Clone the forked repository (under your account) to your computer;
4.  Create a branch in the forked repository.
5.  Make changes in the branch, then push them.
6.  Open a pull request on GitHub into the original repository.
