CSE 403 project: Final release

Overview

Finalize your product taking additional peer-review feedback into
account and provide a demo of the final release of your system together
with a group reflection on your project experience.

Set up

Work with your project team to (1) finalize your product; (2) prepare
and present a live demo of your product and learnings; and (3) conduct a
final project reflection/retrospective.

Instructions

1. Finalize your product (50%)

- Complete the implementation of your product in your GitHub repository.
  As with earlier releases, each group member must contribute to the
  code base, demonstrate proper use of version control, and CI, and must
  code review some contributions. Each contribution must be tested, well
  commented, and reviewed. Fill in the Assignee field of each pull
  request to provide clear visibility of who is the code reviewer. This
  part of the assignment may be individually graded.

- In the top-level README.md file, specify completed
  features/functionality. Include the GitHub tag of the final release
  (including documentation). If you used genAI to help with coding or
  code reviews, be sure to provide attribution here.

- Based on the provided instructions in the top-level README.md file,
  anyone should be able to understand the purpose of the system and
  easily find the user and developer documentation.

- Address the feedback from the peer review comments and issues filed.
  This release should reflect all the good software engineering
  practices discussed during the quarter and build on those initiated in
  your earlier releases.

  Complete this in the main branch of your repository by the due date.

2. Prepare and present a live demo (30%)

- Demonstrate the final system and how a user interacts with it. Briefly
  speak to your key learnings from the project.

- See the instructions for a demo presentation but due to time
  constraints, your presentation should include #1 intro, #2 demo, and
  #6 reflection.

- You will have 9 minutes, strictly enforced.

  Save any slides used in the presentation as a PDF file named
  ProjectName_FinalDemo.pdf.

3. Conduct a team project retrospective (20%)

As a team, provide a retrospective on the overall project. Your
retrospective should address and reflect on the following major
components. You should include what were the main lessons learned that
you would take forward to your next project.

- Features and cuts: Have you completed the major functionality and
  features listed in your original requirements document? What about the
  extra features (stretch goals) you listed? Did you add any additional
  features during the project that were not listed in your original
  requirements document? If you did not implement all features, why not?
  What features did you cut to help you complete the project in time,
  and why did you choose these to be cut?

- Roles and responsibilities: What ended up being your team members’
  roles the majority of the time? How does this differ from your
  original expectations and specifications? Did you change how you
  operated/interacted as a team during the quarter, to improve your
  delivery?

- Process and timeline: Was having a formal (vs ad hoc) software
  development process useful? Did you change your software development
  process throughout the quarter? What occupied the majority of your
  team’s time and workload? How does this differ from your original
  expectations and specifications? Where did you spend too much time,
  and why? Where did you spend too little time, and why?

- Testing and tooling: How much time did you spend on testing; how much
  time did you spend on code reviews? Would you increase or decrease the
  amount of time spent on each, and why? Did you find continuous
  integration (CI) valuable, and why (or why not)? What would you change
  to identify and address such issues earlier in the future?

  Your project retrospective should be at most two (2) pages long. Save
  your retrospective as a PDF file named
  ProjectName_TeamRetrospective.pdf.

Submit and present

1.  Submit files for #2 and #3 to Canvas by due date.
2.  Individually complete the form individual-status-and-contribution,
    provided by your TA. This is a required part of each group milestone
    assignment and contributes to your individual grade.

Sign up for a demo time and plan to attend and learn from all three days
of demos. When it is time to present, you will screen-share from zoom on
your laptop.

Clarifications

- Can we use AI in this milestone? Please see the AI policy in the
  course syllabus. You may be able to use AI tools for part of Part 1
  (software development), but you may not use it for Parts 2 and 3.

- How should we respond to peer feedback? Prioritize and address the
  most important items first. For others, if you won’t respond to them
  (due to they don’t align with your vision, or you don’t have time and
  will cue them up for a future release) be sure to capture the items
  somewhere in your github repo (e.g., file them as an issue). Future
  developers will want to leverage this information.

- Do we need slides for the presentation? The majority of your time
  should be on the live demo. However you also are asked to briefly
  speak to your key learnings from the project. You may want to use
  slides to act as a backdrop for this part of your presentation.

- Can you share more on the doc format of the project group
  retrospective? The font and font size is up to you but please don’t
  use anything smaller than Calibri 11pt. Single spaced is fine. You can
  write shorter but no longer than 2 pages. Write meaningfully - make
  your submission long enough to get your thoughts across. We are
  looking for meaningful reflections and what were the main lessons
  learned that you would take forward to your next project.
