CSE 403 project: Individual retrospective

Overview

Reflect on your project experience and what you learned.

Setup

Individually reflect on your overall project and learning experience.

Instructions

Write an individual retrospective (100%)

Write a retrospective (on your own) of at most 2 pages of lessons
learned from the project experience. The lessons can be in terms of
requirements, design, planning, implementation, tooling, teamwork,
deliveries, etc. Below are some example questions that you might
address, however you are free to consider different ones. The format and
specifics are up to you. Do not use these as a simple checklist to
answer.

- What worked well?

- What would you do differently next time?

- What do you wish you had known ahead of time?

- What surprised you?

- What do you now believe that you did not believe at the beginning of
  the quarter?

- What ideas taught in class do you still not believe?

- What advice would you give future CSE 403 students?

- Are you happy/proud of the work you completed? If not, what could you
  (not others) have changed so that you were (more) happy/proud of your
  accomplishments?

AI tools may not be used for this milestone deliverable. Please see the
AI policy in the course syllabus.

You will be graded on the thoughtfulness, insights, and learnings to
take forward to your next project, along with the justifications of your
answers in terms of your individual project experiences. Be sure to
include specifics from your experiences this quarter to provide context
for the learnings.

The reflection should stand on its own as multiple staff members may be
reading and grading it.

Include your name and project that you worked on as the first line in
the document.

Complete the Code Reviews Survey

Complete the survey about your experience with code reviews in this
course: CSE 403 Code Reviews Survey. The survey is a required
submission, however, you will have the option of whether to include your
answers in the UW CSE research on this topic. Additional details about
the research can be found at the end of the survey.

Submit

1.  Submit a PDF document named
    ProjectName_LastName_IndividualReflection.pdf to Canvas by due date.
2.  Complete the CSE 403 Code Reviews Survey by due date.

Clarifications

Can I use AI for this assignment?

No. Please see the AI policy in the course syllabus.

Can you share more on the doc format?

The font and font size is up to you but don’t use anything smaller than
Calibri 11pt. Single spaced is fine. You can write shorter but no longer
than 2 pages. Write meaningfully; make your submission long enough to
get your thoughts across. We are looking for meaningful reflections and
what were the lessons learned that you would take forward to your next
project.
