How to give a demo presentation

Your presentation should include a slide deck and a demo.

1.  Introduce and motivate of your project. What problem is it solving,
    and in what way? How is it different and better than current
    practice? This is often a single slide.

2.  Demo your system. (This should occupy half, or a bit more, of your
    talk slot.) Focus on the operational use cases — how a user
    interacts with it — and highlight major accomplishments. If
    appropriate to make your demo more realistic, pre-populate any
    database or other data source with (possibly faked) data that a
    typical user would see.

3.  (Appropriate only for an intermediate demo, not for the final
    release.) What challenges have you met to date and how did you
    respond? What additional features do you plan to complete before the
    final release?

4.  Show your architecture. An architecture diagram has boxes and
    arrows. A bullet list of components is not an architecture. Don’t
    draw a diagram that is so detailed that the audience can not read
    the small text, or the audience doesn’t have time to absorb and
    appreciate all the detail.

5.  Discuss anything that is interesting about your implementation
    approach.

6.  Reflect on your experience. (This should be more than one slide and
    is a crucially important part of your presentation.) Discuss what
    you have changed from your initial plans, and what you have learned.
    What was surprising, that you didn’t initially expect? What advice
    do you wish you had had before you started, and what evidence would
    you have needed to heed that advice? Your reflection might touch on:
    open challenges and problems; your process and timeline;
    architecture and design; testing and tooling; and/or other topics.

    Here are some examples of what you might discuss, especially for the
    final presentation.Given time constraints, present only those
    learnings that were most valuable:

    - Features and cuts: Did you complete the functionality and features
      in your original requirements document? What about the extra
      features (stretch goals) you listed? Did you add any additional
      features during the project that were not listed in your original
      requirements document? If you did not implement all features, why
      not? (For example, what features did you cut to help you complete
      the project in time, and why did you choose these to be cut? How
      much work do you estimate you saved by cutting these features?)

    - Roles and responsibilities: What ended up being your team members’
      current roles? How does this differ from your original
      expectations and specifications?

    - Process and timeline: Did you change your software developement
      process model? What occupied the majority of each team member’s
      time and workload? How does this differ from your original
      expectations and specifications? Where did you spend too much
      time, and why? Where did you spend too little time, and why?

    - Testing and tooling: How much time did you spend on testing; how
      much time did you spend on code reviews? Would you increase or
      decrease the amount of time spent on each, and why? What issues
      (bugs, invalid assumptions, etc.) did the peer-review process
      reveal? What aspect of your development process would you change
      to identify and address issue earlier in the future?

Further requirements:

- (For Beta and Final Release demos) Each group member must participate
  in some way in the presentation.

- (For Final Release milestone) You must submit a document that
  addresses the reflection questions, most likely in more detail than
  your presentation (see part 3 of the Final Release Milestone
  assignment). A good way to create your presentation is to brainstorm
  everything that you might say in reflection, then choose the most
  important ones to present. The others can just be in the document.

Tips

Don’t waste time on anything that is obvious or that could be said
identically by other teams. For example, which unit testing framework
you are using is not very interesting, if you have chosen one of the
most commonly cited ones on the web. As another example, don’t say in
your reflection just that “We had some teammate communication problems
at the beginning, but then we met more frequently and resolved them” or
“We had trouble coming up to speed on the X framework.” Those statements
could be said by almost any team. Instead, be more specific about
concrete problems and actions.

Your time in the presentation is limited. Focus on the most important or
interesting issues. Don’t waste time on minor details.

No slide should be a wall of text. You should use a large font, and your
slides should be telegraphic, making the main points without being full
sentences. If you write a lot of text, then the audience has to decide
between reading the text and listening to your spiel. Either way, the
audience will miss information and your presentation will not be as
effective as it should be.

As always, the first slide or top of a document should include all team
members’ full names.

Here is more advice about your presentation: How to give a technical
presentation.
