Course Project

The course project will provide you with hands-on software engineering
experience, involving a team of typically 4-6 students. You will design
and develop your product from the ground up in 9 weeks. The project is
broken down into weekly milestones. Note that the milestone descriptions
may be updated before they are officially assigned (see Calendar) to
reflect current class material and discussions.

- 01 Project proposal
- 02 Requirements and plan
- 03 Architecture and design
- 04 Testing and continuous integration
- 05 Beta release
- 06 Gamma release
- 07 Peer project review
- 08 Final release
- 09 Individual retrospective

Each week you will submit deliverables required for each milestone,
write reports and attend meetings -- just like in real software
development projects. Mark your team calendar to:

- Hold a weekly team meeting every Tuesday during section;
- Submit a project milestone every Tuesday by 11:59pm;
- Submit a weekly project status report every Wednesday by 11:59pm; and
- Hold a weekly project meeting with your TA every Thursday during
  section.

GitHub

We require that you use a GitHub (https://github.com) repository for
version control, issue tracking, and continuous integration. This means
that you will use Git (https://git-scm.com/) for distributed version
control:

- Git book
- Git tutorial
- Git quick reference (list of commands)
- Version control concepts and best practices
- How to create and review a GitHub pull request

We recommend that you submit repository documentation as markdown files
to become proficient in that format. Here is a good summary of the
markdown syntax: GitHub markdown.

You choose the toolset

You will choose the toolset – programming languages, libraries,
frameworks – that you use to implement your product. Regardless of your
choice, your project must follow professional standards and best
practices, such as separation of concerns, modularity, and abstraction;
and use of style checking and automatic formatting.

Your whole team should work together to survey, choose, understand, and
use your tools – just like in industry. You should be or become
comfortable with reading documentation that is sometimes incomplete or
confusing, and with installing and using new software. These are skills
that will stand you in good stead, no matter where your career takes
you.

You may use AI tools to assist with the coding of your group project
milestone deliverables and for any AI-assisted features of your group
project milestone deliverables. However you may not use AI tools for any
other parts of the milestone deliverables. If you use AI tools (1) your
group members must all agree to the use; and (2) you must clearly
disclose the use in the turned-in material. See the Syllabus for more
information on allowable use of AI in this class.

Some students report that the opportunity to learn a new toolset was a
particlarly rewarding part of CSE 403. Doing so may come with some extra
work, however.

Your team is ultimately responsible for choosing and learning these
tools. That said, the staff wants to help you, so if you are stuck,
please ask us! Note that we don’t know every tool or framework that you
might choose.

Revisions

Each week, you will build on your work so far. Your TA will give you
feedback. If your project suffers the same defect two weeks in a row
(for example, you did not adequately address the TA feedback), then you
will lose points from both submissions. Please attend to the feedback
and improve your project.

Weekly status reports

Weekly status reports help to plan and reflect on tasks, and keep the
staff and yourselves informed about your progress.

1. Project status

Each weekly project status report must include the following sections,
with each section written in bullet points:

- High level goal. Describe in one line the overarching goal of your
  next release, which may take multiple weeks to achieve. Example:
  Develop frontend to backend working software for the Beta Release,
  showcasing feature X. This serves to keep everyone aligned with the
  overall vision to which you're working.
- Original goals for the week. This section should be an exact copy of
  the last section from last week (i.e., goals from a week ago). It can
  be empty for the first week.
- Progress and issues. Report on progress and issues: what you did, what
  worked, what you learned, where you had trouble, and where you are
  blocked.
- Questions for the product owner. List any questions for your TA to be
  discussed in your Thursday project meeting.
- Goals for next week. Outline your plans and goals for the following
  week. Each bullet point should include a measurable task and a time
  estimate (no longer than a week). We strongly recommend that you label
  these with the student(s) who is responsible for the item, to promote
  clarity and accountability within your team.

Each weekly status report must be committed to your project git
repository inside a top-level directory called Status Reports. Each
weekly report should be in its own file named projectname-YYYYMMDD,
using the date of the report, and be committed each Wednesday by
11:59pm. We recommend using a markdown doc for your report, which is
most popular with github, however you may use a filetype of your choice.

2. Individual status and contribution reviews

As part of each project milestone assignment, each team member must
individually submit a brief individual status, indicating what they did
and how they would rate their own contribution to the milestone, and a
peer-review, indicating how they would rate each of their teammembers'
contribution. A form will be provided that must be completed by the
milestone deadline. This method of continuous feedback replaces surveys
used in prior quarters, and allows the staff to better assist and reward
student engagement in a timely fashion.

Weekly team meetings

Your team will meet at least once a week to discuss progress and issues,
and/or work together. We have reserved Tuesday sections for this
purpose. In-person meetings have been found most effective to past 403
students, however you can also meet via Zoom or any other conferencing
system if your team members agree. Successful teams often meet more than
once per week and collaboratively write notes and define concrete action
items.

Weekly project meetings

You will meet with your TA for 15 minutes during section on Thursday (or
at another mutually agreed time). You may schedule additional meetings
or use your TA's office hours.

The course staff serves as both customer/product owner and senior
manager. When you have a meeting with your TA, you are allowed to ask
the TA to serve any of these roles, or even to switch roles during the
meeting. As customer/product owner, the TA can help you to determine
what a reasonable set of requirements are, and whether your documents
and prototypes are compelling. As senior manager, the TA can help you to
resolve conflicts or give suggestions about designs, teamwork, and
tools.

It is a bad idea to try to hide information from your customer/product
owner. If things are going poorly or you are having trouble, be upfront.
You may get good suggestions, and the customer/product owner won't feel
blindsided if you are unable to resolve the problems on your own. It is
a doubly bad idea to try to hide problems or conflicts from your senior
manager. Instead, use your senior manager as a resource to help solve
those issues.
