Syllabus

Course description

In this course, students learn and gain practical experience with
software engineering principles, techniques, and tools. Topics in this
course include requirements analysis, specification, design,
abstraction, programming style, testing, maintenance, communication,
teamwork, and software project management. The practical experience
centers on a quarter-long team project, in which a software development
project is carried through all the stages of the software life cycle.
Particular emphasis is placed on communication skills and on developing
maintainable software. In-class activities further provide a hands-on
experience in using state-of-the-art techniques and tools.

Prerequisites

- CSE 331 and CSE 332

Course format

The class meets three times a week for lectures (Monday, Wednesday and
Friday). All class meetings are in-person. Additionally, individual
groups are required to meet twice a week during section for team and
project meetings (Tuesday and Thursday). Classroom material is enhanced
with assigned readings and in-class exercises. A major component of the
course is teamwork on a group project. Individual contributions include
exercises, retrospectives, an exam, and participation.

Grading

Grades will be based on the following:

- 60%: Project milestone deliverables
- 15%: In-class exercises
- 15%: Exam
- 10%: Participation

Your individual grade on the group project milestone deliverables may be
adjusted based on your contribution.
General information about grading at the University of Washington is
available as part of the UW Student Guide.

Policies

Late Policy

Assignments must be submitted on Canvas by the due date and time. Unless
otherwise noted, all times are given in PDT (Pacific Time). Group
project milestones may not be submitted past the deadline. For other
assignments, the submission site will remain open for 24 hours after the
deadline. Assignments submitted within 24 hours after the deadline will
incur a 20% penalty. Assignments will not be accepted beyond 24 hours
after the deadline.

Academic Integrity

Except for clearly labeled group submissions, all assignments and
projects in the course are to be done by you and you alone. Violation
will result in an immediate F grade and possible initiation of formal
procedures. We use automated techniques and manual checks to correlate
submissions. At the same time, we encourage students to help each other
learn the course material. As in most courses, there is a boundary
separating these two situations. You are allowed to consult with other
students in the current class to help you understand the material or
homework/project requirements (i.e., the problem definition). However,
you may not collaborate in any way when constructing your solution: the
solution to an individual homework/project must be prepared by you
working alone. In particular, you are not allowed to collaboratively
work out a detailed solution to the extent that your submissions are
identifiably similar. Please refer to the following websites for
additional information on the Allen School and UW overall academic
policies: Allen School Policies and UW Policies.

Use of AI Tools

You may use AI tools to assist with the coding (and source code review)
of your group project milestone deliverables and for any AI-assisted
features of your group project milestone deliverables. However you may
not use AI tools for any other parts of the milestone deliverables or
class assignments. If you use AI tools (1) your group members must all
agree to the use; and (2) you must clearly disclose the use in the
turned-in material. If you have any questions as to what constitutes
acceptable use of AI, please talk to the course instructor.

Code of Conduct

The Allen School Code of Conduct articulates the behavioral expectations
to which we hold ourselves and each other accountable. These
expectations promote excellence and integrity in all of our activities,
ensure that all persons are treated with respect, dignity, civility, and
courtesy, promote constructive communication and collaborative teamwork,
and articulate the available reporting and resolution pathways if
violations of these expectations occur. Please refer to the following
websites for details on the Code of Conduct at the Allen School and UW
overall: Allen School Policies and UW Policies.

Course Communication

To ensure the security of your personal information, all communication
related to this course should be conducted through either the course LMS
(Canvas or EdStem Platform) or via your UW or CSE-issued email address.
Personal email addresses should not be used for course-related
correspondence.

Accommodations

If you require any special services or accommodations during a course
please make sure to inform us within the first week of that course. This
will give us time to plan accordingly to ensure that you get the help
and support you need. Please refer to the following website for
additional information on disabilty accommodations: UW Disability
Accommodations Resources, and the following website for additional
information on religious accommodations: UW Religious Accommodations
Policy.
