Unit 2: Document Scanner

In the first unit, we talked about how LLMs make previously challenging
tasks involving the semantics of text tractable and cheap. The
interpretive abilities of GenAI systems continue to impress in domains
beyond plain text-based understanding -- next we will revisit the
capabilities we can expect from our programs in working with rich
documents and images.

People have a broad range of PDFs, images, presentations, spreadsheets,
and so on in their workflows. Until now, working with documents in these
formats required tools like:

- Specialized parsers and editors for each file format
- Models trained for a specific task (e.g. OCR or “optical character
  recognition”, recognizing faces or people in images)

While tools like these are still useful, many use cases can be served by
sending files to a LLM and having it extract structured data. ChatGPT
and Claude explicitly advertise this feature, for example, and
applications are showing up to summarize notes, do professional
workflows like quotes and billing, people talk about using ChatGPT to
review their tax returns, and it's clear that AI systems can do basic
image recognition and text extraction tasks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Motivating Example: Track Spending on Paper Receipts

What if we wanted to track our spending (on groceries, clothes, etc),
but we mostly have paper receipts, not digital transactions? It would be
useful to have a scanning app that can take photos of our receipts and
recover structured data from them, and then put the user in the loop to
correct errors and provide guidance on categorization.

[Receipt Scanner Example]

  Q: What mistakes do you see in the above structured data?

       Data Source         LLM Processing                          User Review           Downstream
     ┌──────────────┐      ┌──────────────┐                       ┌──────────────┐      ┌──────────────┐
     │              │      │              │                       │              │      │              │
     │  photos /    │─────▶│  extract     │──────────────────────▶│  verify /    │─────▶│  store /     │
     │  scans /     │      │  structured  │   structured output   │  correct     │      │  aggregate / │
     │  PDFs        │      │  data        │   (items, totals,     │              │      │  visualize   │
     │              │      │              │    dates, ...)        └──────┬───────┘      └──────────────┘
     └──────────────┘      └──────────────┘                              │
                                  ▲                                      │
                                  │          user corrections,           │
                                  └──────────  categories, metadata ─────┘

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Outline

1.  Mixed-media APIs: passing images and PDFs alongside text
2.  Working with an agent: pushing back on defaults, keeping project
    context, and building the system at a pace you can internalize
3.  Types as design: using types to structure abstractions and
    communication with an agent
4.  Putting the user in the loop: corrections and categories feeding
    back into extraction

Mixed-media Queries

Modern models support mixes of text, images, and other inputs. Passing
images directly with a request is broadly available:

- OpenAI: Giving a model images as input
- Claude: Base64-encoded image example
- Gemini: Passing inline image data

Similar APIs exist for documents like PDFs (Gemini docs), and even
speech, audio, and video.

Documents and images are an extremely broad category of data, ranging
from candid photos to cartoons to artwork to structured data like
receipts (above) to academic papers and more. Each application that
works with documents semantically likely picks a subset and either looks
for or imposes some structure on them.

For these notes, we're going to focus on a particular kind of structured
document: images of paper receipts like the one above. We will build a
web application, targeted at fairly general users, for doing this.

We will make a few assumptions; a truly mass-market app would probably
need to generalize these eventually. In particular, we'll assume a
US/English context, so expect $USD on receipts, and no language options.
We'll build it as a web application that could eventually make its way
into a phone app.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Outline

1.  ~~Mixed-media APIs: passing images and PDFs alongside text~~ [done]
2.  Working with an agent: pushing back on defaults, keeping project
    context, and building the system at a pace you can internalize
3.  Types as design: using types to structure abstractions and
    communication with an agent
4.  Putting the user in the loop: corrections and categories feeding
    back into extraction

Starting from Scratch with an Agent

Let's start from an empty directory, and just the discussion above to
guide us. My current favorite coding assistant is Claude Code; I'm
curious what progress we can make quickly, and what decision points come
up.

  Q: What are some decisions you expect to have to make?

There are a few strategies we could use for working with the agent. We
could just write a short sentence saying what we want:

That's a lot of decisions to make! Also, Claude doesn't always give us
the same options; small changes in what we say produce different
reactions:

  Q: What are some differences? How might they affect the long-term
  trajectory of the app?

  Q: Which of the mentioned tools have you heard of? Which haven't you
  heard of?

  Q: How do these responses make you feel?

The prompt we gave is a good one for getting a sense of the landscape of
the application. However, it's a bad one for having Claude do work. In
particular I'm extremely suspicious of “Let me know and I'll get
building” in the second interaction -- I am nowhere near ready to
“build” all of that!

One thing we have done with this interaction is learned that we need to
think about a few things. We may not have thought of these, or maybe we
did, depending on our experience as developers of this kind of
application.

- The frontend (the stuff that runs in the user's browser)
- The backend (the stuff that runs on a server somewhere)
- The storage (the place where user data is persisted on disk)
- The GenAI part (the Image -> ReceiptData function)

As an engineer, my preference is to try to build things incrementally.
This is what Claude is hinting at with the “MVP” in the first
interaction (jargon meaning “Minimum Viable Product”). I tend to find it
useful to work on components I know well, and then for anything I don't
know, see how it connects to the component I understand well.

Given where we are situated in this class, we can assume we know
something about building the GenAI part: we need to set up API tokens,
make API calls to a model with prompts and responses, think about
evaluation and test inputs, and so on. We can keep in mind that this
will be in the context of a larger application as we do that.

So let's proceed with that in mind:

Two things happened here:

1.  I made a choice to use a JavaScript-focused implementation
    (TypeScript). This is a bit of a matter of taste: I have experience
    with it, I like static types, but also it's useful in the context of
    this class to show that even if you were more comfortable with
    Python, Claude is perfectly comfortable with TypeScript.
2.  Claude rushed into trying to set up a whole TypeScript project,
    ending on a prompt to run npm init, which is the setup command for
    creating a Node.js project. I'm not ready for that!

Pushing Back

So, I decided to tell Claude that it should not do this anymore!

    ❯ I would like to know more about what you're going to do
      and why. Can you write out the plan for this part to a
      receipt-design.md file?

    ⏺ Write(receipt-design.md)
      ⎿  Wrote 81 lines to receipt-design.md
          1 # Receipt Parser — Design
         … +71 lines (ctrl+o to expand)

      Recalled 1 memory, wrote 3 memories (ctrl+o to expand)
    ⏺ Written to receipt-design.md. The highlights:

      - Claude vision + tool use to extract structured receipt
      data in one step [...]
      Take a look and let me know if you'd like to change
      anything before I start building.

    ❯ What memories did you just write?

    ⏺ I saved one feedback memory: "Explain before coding" — a
      note that you want me to present the design and reasoning
      before jumping into implementation, based on you stopping
      me when I started running commands without explaining.

    ❯ Oh interesting. Can you put that in Claude.md?

      Searched for 1 pattern (ctrl+o to expand)

    ⏺ Write(CLAUDE.md)
      ⎿  Wrote 3 lines to CLAUDE.md
          1 # Project Guidelines
          2
          3 - Present the design and rationale before jum
            ping into code. For any non-trivial piece of
            work, explain the approach and get buy-in bef
            ore implementing.

    ⏺ Now I'll remove the memory version since CLAUDE.md is the
      better home for it — it's loaded automatically and doesn't
       need the memory system.
     ⏺ Bash(rm
          /Users/joe/.claude/projects/-Users-joe-src-receipt-sca
          nner-demo/memory/feedback_explain_before_coding.md)
      ⎿  Done

      Recalled 1 memory, wrote 1 memory (ctrl+o to expand)

    ⏺ Done. The guideline is now in CLAUDE.md at the project
      root and the memory entry has been cleaned up.

There's a few things that just happened, mostly having to do with my
workflow preferences. You might have different ones, but you should have
some. Coding agents come with defaults that push us along a particular
workflow – you do not have to and should not accept this default without
questioning it.

Here's what happened and why I did it:

1.  I asked it to save the design to a file rather than just having it
    in chat. Now I can commit and push the design, more easily share it
    with teammates, refer to it in a new session, etc.
2.  I had it save the design file in the repository. Claude has its own
    notion of state (I've seen it make plan files in ~/.claude). For
    some workflows that is probably good... but if I code on another
    computer (or my teammate does), we and our agents benefit from
    access to it.
3.  I pushed back on Claude's bias towards implementing. Not only do I
    not want it to do so here, but I don't want it to do so in general
    on this project! One thing that is cool is that Claude picked up on
    my pushback without me writing a separate message: in other
    interactions I've had to say more explicitly “I don't like it when
    you prompt me to generate code right away. Remember this
    preference.”
4.  I noticed (paying attention to the output) that Claude saved it to a
    “memory” and asked about it. Now, I really dislike how memories get
    configured! Memories are stored in state local to the user, again in
    something like ~/.claude/projects/.../memory/.... As an engineer, I
    want (most of) my settings to be per-project and version controlled,
    not per-machine or per-user.
5.  I pointed this out to Claude and it moved it for me and
    “admitted” that CLAUDE.md was a better place for it! My take on this
    line—“CLAUDE.md is the better home for it”—is not that Claude
    “thinks” this is “globally true” or anything (if it did it wouldn't
    have put it in a memory). Rather, it's agreeing with me; these tools
    tend towards agreeing with us because

- it would be way more frustrating if they didn't
- different programmers do have preferences and good arguments that
  conflict, so the tool follows your lead, and
- likely some indirect effects of it making us feel good and continue to
  use the product

  Q: Have you used memories or CLAUDE.md or the equivalent for your
  favorite agent?

  Q: Have you ever felt “rushed along” by your coding agent?

  Q: What other strategies have you used to manage design documents with
  your coding agent?

Building, Designing, and Learning, with Claude

This is a place where programming assignments, despite their many
virtues, don't really capture the experience of “owning” a product.

With that useful setup work done, let's move on to building this
application. As we do so, we're going to be reflective about what we are
getting out of the agent, and where we should be pushing back.

When I work on a new project, I find that I do a lot of learning about
the system I'm building. One of the best ways to develop that
understanding is to build incrementally. Claude listed a lot of things
we need – persistent storage, a frontend, a backend, the AI subsystem
for parsing, and so on. Some of these we may understand better than
others. Let's build one at a time; I'm going to start with the AI
subsystem, and then later build the user experience on top of it.

Notice that I'm not trying to fully engage with the broad design file
yet. It's useful context, but I want to build one step at a time.

  Q: What's a good prompt to move forward with that? What information is
  the agent likely to ask for in a followup?

Let's try something:

This churns for a while and produces a running starting point.

A few things to notice:

- I provided the sample code for using the TritonAI stuff, and the docs
  page for the models
- I didn't provide a ton of information about what I wanted out of
  the CLI. I could have done a lot more work to spec this out! But also
  it's useful to see something working (e.g. can these vision APIs do
  what I want with a receipt?)

Along the way:

- I provided a sample image (similar to the one in the screenshot above)
  to test on when prompted by Claude. I just copy-pasted a photo I had
  of a receipt in my house.
- Claude got error messages relating to the model. I realized I had
  given out-of-date model information and 401 errors came back. Claude
  itself went and used the discovery API on TritonAI by itself, and
  figured out which models should be used.
- For now it chose claude-opus, which is rather self-serving of
  Anthropic 🙃, and is fairly expensive. We may want to revisit this.
- Claude got TypeScript error messages. It had not included some
  dependencies (like dotenv) and it made a few small errors about
  JavaScript/TypeScript setup. It fixed them and rewrote code.

We should take a moment to acknowledge how impressive this is! My sample
was in Python, I asked it to adapt it to TypeScript and test it out, and
it generated a running example. It took about 2-3 minutes. I'm a
reasonably competent typist (though I'm not winning any words per minute
awards) and at least a median tool user, and getting something like this
set up takes me much more than 2-3 minutes!

Of course, along the way Claude made a ton of design decisions without
consulting us. It picked a system prompt, picked default categories for
items on receipts, picked data representations for items, and more.

  Q: What should we do next?

  Q: Look at the commit Claude made. What is a design decision you agree
  with? One you don't agree with?

My choice was to next do some work on eval. I want to know where the
good and bad receipt parsing is. If you're interested, here's a long-ish
capture where I go through that (for a more casual reading, you don't
have to look at the whole thing):

The summary was this:

- I had a handful of personal receipts to use as eval data
- The Opus model is fairly trustworthy – a good way to make test data
  was for me to run the script with opus and check the difference to the
  receipt myself.
- api-mistral-small-3.2-2506 made more mistakes, but is dramatically
  cheaper and faster. So my general strategy is to get
  close-to-ground-truth data with opus, and then eval that data against
  other models
- The definition of a “match” is tricky: models are non-deterministic
  and sometimes return a string like "YOGURT STRAW BANAN" vs
  "6 Pack Yogurt Straw Banana" or other variations. I went back and
  forth with Claude on different choices of fuzzy string matching to get
  something plausible
- It seems unlikely the models will usefully get the human item name
  that a user wants, and noise is inevitable. Receipts have line items
  for things like bottle deposits or discounts, weird abbreviations like
  VNYANDARC (which refers to vineyard for a bottle of wine), and more.
  We can improve this long tail with prompting and smart logic, but this
  kind of thing is where the user comes in.

You can see the relevant changes at this commit

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Outline

1.  ~~Mixed-media APIs: passing images and PDFs alongside text~~ [done]
2.  ~~Working with an agent: pushing back on defaults, keeping project
    context, and building the system at a pace you can internalize~~
    [done]
3.  Types as design: using types to structure abstractions and
    communication with an agent
4.  Putting the user in the loop: corrections and categories feeding
    back into extraction

A User Interface

We know the AI part of the system can be made to work; there's more eval
to do, we probably want to try more cameras and stores and scan images
with more junk in the background, etc, but it's plausible. Next we can
build an application around this. We could make a lot of decisions about
how we want to do that. We could build an app (like installable via the
app store), a standalone program (like with an installer .exe or .dmg),
a web application, and more.

Implementing a Server

Probably the greatest virtue of the application approaches is they sort
of assume the use of the user's filesystem. The advantage of a web
application is its relative ubiquity and ease of testing and, well, Joe
is an experienced web developer.

I'm choosing a web application here, but the other options are fine and
come with their own tradeoffs. We will want a server that stores
persistent data and a pile of JavaScript on the frontend that can talk
to and render the information stored in the server. I have a strong
preference for starting from data definitions, so let's do that:

  Q: What do you think about the proposed schema?

I see one thing wrong immediately: it's super bad practice to store
money as floating point! We never want to do arithmetic on prices and
see a price like 0.6000000001. Standard best practice is to store a
whole number of cents as an integer. This is a clear place where
averaging over all the code has probably given Claude a bad completion.
Let's see how it reacts!

Notice that Claude is quick to agree with us calling it out. We can
actually convince Claude of many things if we try. A useful (wrong, but
useful) mental model is that it's giving the most likely autocomplete of
a developer who is quite competent across a breathtaking array of
technologies, but exists only to help you write stuff. That completion
includes “you're right!” when you tell it about a well-known programming
pattern.

Also, Claude is being pushy, saying “start building” again. That's
annoying. Let's tell it not to be, and that we'd like to think about the
design. Only then do we want to go on.

Below we make that update to the config and then look at the planned
spec. Our goal is to get to the request handling part of a web server
and the database that stores the data. My goal here is to get to the
point where I can talk about types. By that I mean TypeScript types and
database schemas that have field names, relations, and so on.

  Q: What do you think of the types shown in the editor at the end? Are
  they what you expected? What questions do you have about them?

Personally, I'm wondering which of these are storage types and which of
these are logical or operational types. As in, will all three of these
get stored in the database? They were put in db.ts. I also want to go
further and see where the types will be used. Before code gets
generated, this really helps me get a picture of what is going to go
where.

I also tell Claude to clean up the interface. I want my TODOs and plans
and other things in files, not in transient session state in Claude's
UI.

The strings in `app.get/put` describe URL patterns (“routes” often) and
an associated handler with `req`uest data and a place to send a
`res`ponse.

Here we are getting to some sketches of code. I again want to know what
the story is with types. Generally I need type-level data to think about
abstractions, what data goes where, and so on. So I'm consistent about
asking Claude for it. In particular I want to know what kinds of data I
can expect to see (and autocomplete in my own editor!) on the requests,
and what should go back in each response.

So I prompt for that, and end up learning a lot about the API in the
process:

  Q: Describe the kind of error I was worried about with incremental
  edits. What's an example of what it would look like to make that
  mistake and accidentally delete stuff?

  Q: Is what Claude said about the middle type parameter accurate? How
  would you know?

There's some deliberate learning and engineering happening here:

- It's quite easy for programming with generic request and response
  objects to degenerate into programming against loose JSON-like
  structures. I'd like to get from the HTTP types into better checked
  types as soon as possible.
- The types help me talk about abstraction boundaries, AND should help
  Claude talk about them as well. If we keep using the same types for
  different functions, etc, it's literally fewer tokens than trying to
  think about a JSON schema over and over. And we can more easily write
  these type names into documentation, etc.
- I was honestly not sure how TypeScript and Express interact. I've done
  some Express programming (the library that sets up the routes and the
  req/res pairs), but never typed. So I was legitimately learning what
  that API does. I know that TypeScript types in many places document
  assumptions rather than enforcing a type, so that wasn't surprising to
  me (though it may be to you!), and I wanted to think about where those
  boundaries are in this code.

In cases like these it's helpful for me to not be passive – Claude's
default choices are not the ones I want. I'm still saving a lot of time
and typing (I never opened a docs page for Express, for example). I'm
thinking a little bit about if I can clean up these types at all, what
validation will look like, what zod is, and so on. Those are all good
things for me to think about to learn more about the system I'm
building.

Overall I think I grok what's going on, so I'm happy moving on.

Here I have a useful conversation about logic and representation, and
the type-based thinking helps me out a lot. I am very skeptical of
Claude's choice to implement receipt update as “delete and re-add
everything.” That just seems wrong and like it will eventually break
some relationship between database tables, end up being very inefficient
in a large batch update someday, etc. So I push back, and we decide that
the receipt items can have their own notion of identity.

This back and forth made me think that I can probably be doing something
to prompt Claude that I care deeply about good design at every step.
Things feel a bit prototype-y to me here, and like the vibe is “get it
working”.

Then we start doing a bit of API design – what should an “edit” to a
receipt look like? We settle on a standard operator-based update
description, where the receipt updates can give a set of `ItemAdd |
ItemUpdate | ItemDelete` operations that describe what to change. This
is a huge improvement, opens up possibilities of having undo later (if
we persist the changes), makes the API more flexible and allows just
referring to small, specific edits rather than reconstructing the whole
receipt every time, etc.

  Q: Have you ever seen operations expressed in a datatype like this
  before?

This is an instance of the Command Pattern

So now we have a decent sense of two components' types:

- The request handlers, which get HTTP requests from the user
  (presumably their browser, but also testable from the command-line or
  from programs), and respond with JSON
- The db functions, which will store and retrieve things from the
  database, and so some work to apply logic around updates

There seems to be a sensible place from which to get some code down. One
observation I'd like to make – this point is often where, as a student,
you would get the "specification" as a programming assignment writeup
with type signatures and start filling in "implementation". Look at how
much work we've done (and the course staff for your courses have likely
done) to decide all of this! What gets a type, what interface will work
well or be error prone, what technology to use, and so on. A useful
analogy for students who are experiencing this shift to agent-based
coding is that if you can write a high-quality programming assignment
writeup, you can probably write reasonable specs for agents.

Those skills have always been important, but now they are central.

  Q: As you watch, think about this: What were some other options for
  how to refactor parseReceipt to accept the Buffer rather than a path?

As Claude goes through the implementation, I have some coaching to do.

- Because of the signature parseReceipt(imagePath, model) API we set up
  for extraction, Claude aims for a path-based input. This requires
  saving to a temp file (which this multer library, which I just learned
  about, handles). But that's annoying, I would rather not save a file
  just to read it back into memory one step later. I have to nudge
  Claude to think this through, and we do an API update to make it
  reasonable to pass this through.
- I get a little testy with Claude because it seemingly ignored some of
  my remarks about memories and Claude.md earlier, so I make it listen
  to me. I also try to tone down the empty praise.

With this, we have an implementation that's worth testing. I want to
move on to writing enough tests to make sure this all runs, then we can
hook it up to a browser-based frontend.

More learning about the available APIs. Also we add a new API endpoint
for testing that we have a pretty good argument is good for our future
selves as well – we can send receipts as JSON data to create them
instead of just parsing them. Claude makes a good point that we may want
a manual receipt-input interface, so the endpoint is just generally
useful.

I'm very happy that Claude is writing this test code and not me. I've
written a lot of test code like this in my life and... I see no major
personal loss in never doing it again. I can see what it's doing, I know
how to add more tests as we go along, I appreciate the confidence that
everything runs, and feel good about moving on.

The commit we made

It's worth taking a bit of time to do some cleanup and write a few more
tests. I want to keep the design document up to date, and make sure we
test the various flavors of update at least a little bit before moving
on:

Implementing a Frontend

We now have all the logic for parsing and storing receipts exposed
through a web server. We've made a number of technology decisions and
have basic tests in place to make sure we can do all the receipt work
programmatically. Next is to build the user interface. I go into this
with an attitude of keeping things simple; mainly I want to see how to
connect a frontend with incremental user corrections to the
infrastructure we have.

This is an interesting case where my experience directly comes into
play, and Claude missed what I think was a straightforward, good idea.
IndexedDB is a standard feature in browsers for storing reasonable-sized
data (hundreds of MB), so it's a natural choice rather than storing
images in memory and losing them on page navigation. Of course, this is
a place where I have particular expertise, so I can see missing this
(and maybe it will cause problems later that I don't know about).

This is one of those cases where a non-expert would have “unknown
unknowns” – there was no indication there were options other than the
ones Claude suggested. This suggests that in situations where we're
unhappy with Claude's suggestions, it can be worth pushing back (“are
you sure there's no other way?”), talking to experts, doing some
external research, or asking it in a fresh session to try and get a
broader perspective.

Some weird things happened with the UI in this clip (I think I
misunderstood what file was being presented either due to scroll or the
layered combination of terminal stuff I have running to record) so there
are some blips.

The relevant part is at the end – I noticed that Claude had duplicated
the receipt types from the server to the client code. While it may at
some point make sense for them to differ, it might never make sense and
it certainly is a blatant duplication now. I was confused at first and
thought they may have actually differed on nullability, but they were
effectively identical. This kind of housekeeping is important – the more
duplication the more chance there is for drift, the more context is
taken up with refactors or field additions, etc. This is a place where a
principle that applies to human understanding of code matters for the
agent as well!

One thing that was nice in the ensuing series of edits and builds
(clipped out because there's not much to see in the recording, just lots
of flashing diffs and error messages and confirmations) is that Claude
figured out the import/build details of sharing the types.ts file across
the server and client. Those details were almost certainly going to be
boring and frustrating and derail my design and coding thought
processes, and instead I stayed pretty focused.

With that refactoring tip Claude went ahead and implemented and then I
let it start up some “Vite” servers and test them. I realized I had no
idea what was going on and asked for a bit more clarification and some
help with the logistics of running and testing myself:

At this point I run npm run dev myself and visit the app in a browser.

I noticed a few things, like no ability to delete items and some bad
scroll behavior. At this point, we are into a test-refine-design
workflow on the user experience. We can apply the same kinds of thinking
to adding new features, checking them against a solid type-based design,
getting feedback, and so on.

[Scanner Demo]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Outline

1.  ~~Mixed-media APIs: passing images and PDFs alongside text~~ [done]
2.  ~~Working with an agent: pushing back on defaults, keeping project
    context, and building the system at a pace you can internalize~~
    [done]
3.  ~~Types as design: using types to structure abstractions and
    communication with an agent~~ [done]
4.  Putting the user in the loop: corrections and categories feeding
    back into extraction

Putting the User in the Loop

So far, the categories are just a hardcoded string that Claude picked
for us. Let's add the ability for users to change them, and then have
them become a part of the prompt going forward.

  Q: Pick some of the 1-6 options Claude gave us and come up with a
  response – a followup question, a refinement, or a disagreement. Don't
  agree with all 6. Any overall design reactions.

These are interesting! This is a moment where I feel like I'm actually
co-designing. Typically the design space of user interfaces is pretty
wide open, and it's nice to think through a number of ideas related to
how this is going to work. Items 3, 4, and 5 are interesting because
they are the backend data consistency issues that are directly a
consequence of the user interface I proposed.

I don't have any major objections, this seems like a right way to go (at
this point there's almost certainly no the right way to go). I proceed
by giving pretty minor point-by-point feedback, and have some new ideas
along the way:

I have a moment of doubt – shouldn't we give Categories an identity and
not have these strings all around? For better or worse I'm mollified by
Claude's confidence that it will be an easy fix later.

But I also have the idea that we can lean on the LLM to generate the
initial set of categories. At least for what I want to build (and learn
about) this is interesting because we impose basically no app structure
on the categories and let them be determined solely by the model and the
user working together through the interface we give them.

In the next clip I just let Claude cook for a bit. I'm scanning the code
step-by-step, and thanks to the Claude.md I set up, I'm getting fairly
step by step code. I don't have a lot of comments for this code; it does
more or less what I expect. I don't plan to find any new major
abstractions here.

There's definitely some work that can be done in the future around the
dynamic prompt generation. It's still very string-template-y. But what
Claude does for now with putting in the helpers learnCategory and
buildSystemPrompt(knownCategories) is about what I'd try at first, and
does abstract out where the categories are. I do have some concern that
the type Category was changed to the type string in a ReceiptItem, which
is a sort of loss. There may be some type design we can do to make
Category mean “string that is one from this list”, but given that we
want to let the LLM generate some of these, a static guarantee becomes
very tricky.

If I really wanted to experiment, I may try to parameterize over some
kind of category-collection strategy to make it easier to experiment
(just unioning over existing ReceiptItem categories; in the future
including other users' suggestions to seed the system, having different
seed sets depending on what kind of receipt it is). That feels like
premature abstraction, and I'm super interested in getting to the user
interface, because I want to understand the look and feel. So I enjoy
the wonders of code creation getting me there:

Now I want to get some UI code going. I redescribe the combo box, but
the whole idea is in context so it's just the reasonable next step. More
payoff from our good design discussion earlier; the space of reasonable
completions of code given all the guidance we've given is pretty narrow
here!

I have more or less no comments on this code at first. I noticed that
there was an opportunity for a helper with the repeated configuration of
the fetching code (it keeps repeating application/json and some other
config parameters). That could be cleaned up. I just made a mental note;
I probably should have added it to the real TODOs so I don't forget that
there's a refactoring opportunity. However, focus matters, too, and I
want to test a UI. Here's how my first test looked:

[Categories]

See the annoyance? I actually made a few categories, but when the
combobox opens the starting filter text is always the pre-assigned
category (in this case "Groceries").

  Q: Make a UI suggestion for what to do that would be better.

And this gets us to a much happier version where we can categorize
interactively with the combobox immediately showing the options we can
choose from.

[Categories]

I really drove towards getting the user interface going here. My next
steps would probably be to work with the interface a bit, and then use
that as an opportunity to revisit the code that's there and refactor as
I added new features and cleaned up workflows. This part of testing and
design needs a person; I'm not sure I would trust the LLM to navigate
the application and give feedback, though I'm sure someone is working on
just that!

There are plenty of UI improvements to think about from here that I do
think will need a human eye (the application is, after all, built to
help humans):

- A big one is showing aggregate information across categories as a
  separate page per-category (brainstormed with Claude but not
  implemented)
- Thinking about getting “item names” that are user friendly: for
  example aggregating items to the name “Milk” or “Eggs” independent of
  brand name, and getting those categorized
- Avoiding duplicate uploads
- Doing better reporting of per-unit prices vs. overall price for a line
  item
- General styling and look+feel improvements
- and more!

Bonus: Login and Authentication

In class last Thursday, we talked about how to use Claude when you don't
know something. I didn't quite go to “making a device driver” or
something really substantially outside my expertise; that might be for
another week.

However, I did want to think about user accounts and login. I also have
wanted to learn how passkeys work for a while, and think they have a
great security model. This cast shows how I used Claude to learn about
and think through adding user accounts, but also learning about passkeys
and relating them to my understanding of auth.

I don't have a lot of narrative notes beyond sharing some of my thought
process via the cast.

Happy hacking!
