Machine Learning in Production (17-445/17-645/17-745) / AI Engineering (11-695)

Spring 2026

CMU course that covers how to build, deploy, assure, and maintain
software products with machine-learned models, from classic ML to LLMs
to AI agents. Includes the entire lifecycle from a prototype ML model to
an entire system deployed in production that you will run and update for
several weeks under high load. Extensively covers also responsible AI
(including safety, security, fairness, explainability) and MLOps. For
earlier offerings see websites for Fall 2019, Summer 2020, Fall 2020,
Spring 2021  Spring 2022, Fall 2022, Spring 2023, Spring 2024, Fall
2024, Spring 2025, and Fall 2025. This Spring 2026 offering is designed
for students with some data science experience (e.g., has taken a
machine learning course, has used sklearn) and basic programming skills
(e.g., basic Python programming with libraries, can navigate a Unix
shell), but will not expect a software engineering background (i.e.,
experience with testing, requirements, architecture, process, or teams
is not required). Going forward we expect to offer this course regularly
both in the spring and in the fall semester.

Resources

For researchers, educators, or others interested in this topic, we share
all course material, including slides and assignments, under a creative
commons license on GitHub (https://github.com/mlip-cmu) and have also
published a textbook with chapters corresponding to almost every
lecture. A while ago we also wrote an article describing the rationale
and the initial design of this course: Teaching Software Engineering for
AI-Enabled Systems. We plan to release video recordings of the Spring
2026 lectures publicly on Youtube. Until then old video recordings from
Summer 2020 can be fund at the old course page, though they are quite
outdated by now. We would be happy to see this course or a similar
version taught at other universities -- reach out if interested. See
also an annotated bibliography on research in this field.

What to Expect...

This is a course for those who want to build and operate software
products with machine learning, not just models and demos. We assume
that you can train a model or build prompts/agents and compete on
benchmarks, but what does it take to turn the model into a product and
actually deploy it, have confidence in its quality, and successfully
operate and maintain it at scale?

The course is designed to establish a working relationship between
software engineers and data scientists: both contribute to building
ML-enabled systems but have different expertise and focuses. To work
together they need a mutual understanding of their roles, tasks,
concerns, and goals and build a working relationship. This course is
aimed at software engineers who want to build robust and responsible
products meeting the specific challenges of working with ML components
and at data scientists who want to understand the requirements of the
model for production use and want to facilitate getting a prototype
model into production; it facilitates communication and collaboration
between both roles. The course is a good fit for student looking at a
career as an ML engineer or product manager. The course focuses on all
the steps needed to turn a model into a production system in a
responsible and reliable manner.

[Course overview]

It covers topics such as:

- How to design for wrong predictions the model may make? How to assure
  safety and security despite possible mistakes? How to anticipate
  mistakes before they occur and how to manage risks? How to design the
  user interface and the entire system to mitigate mistakes when
  operating in the real world? How can modern architectures like RAG and
  agentic systems help or hinder such efforts?
- How to reliably deploy, monitor, and update models in production? How
  can we test the entire machine learning pipeline? How can MLOps tools
  help to automate and scale the deployment process? How can we
  experiment in production (A/B testing, canary releases)? How do we
  detect data quality issues, concept drift, and feedback loops in
  production?
- How to scale production ML systems? How do we design a system to
  process huge amounts of training data, telemetry data, and user
  requests? Should we use stream processing, batch processing, lambda
  architecture, or data lakes?
- How to test and debug production ML systems? How can we evaluate the
  quality of a model/agent’s not only on benchmarks but in ways that
  matter for a production system (slicing, rubrics, capabilities,
  LLM-as-a-judge, ...)? How do can we know how well we are doing in
  production, while safeguarding against disasters? How can we test the
  entire ML-enabled system, not just the model? What lessons can we
  learn from software testing, automated test case generation,
  simulation, and continuous integration for testing for production
  machine learning?
- Which qualities matter beyond a model’s prediction accuracy? How can
  we identify and measure important quality requirements, including
  learning and inference latency, operating cost, scalability,
  explainablity, fairness, privacy, robustness, and safety? Does the
  application need to be able to operate offline and how often do we
  need to update the models? How do we identify what’s important in a
  ML-enabled product in a production setting for a business? How do we
  resolve conflicts and tradeoffs?
- How to work effectively in interdisciplinary teams? How can we bring
  data scientists, software engineers, UI designers, product managers,
  project managers, domain experts, big data specialists, operators,
  legal council, and other roles together and develop a shared
  understanding and team culture?

Examples and case studies in this class focus on real products with
commercial potential, not just benchmarks. For example, we do not
discuss object detection in general, but how to use it in delivery
robots or for image search on a photo sharing site. Some of these
products may be less flashy, but have real commercial potential today,
such as customer support agents, insurance fraud investigation, content
recommendation, creating meeting minutes from recordings, and diagnosing
diseases.

An extended group project focuses on building, deploying, evaluating,
and maintaining a robust and scalable movie recommendation service under
somewhat realistic “production” conditions with 1 million active users.

Learning Outcomes

After taking this course, among others, students should be able to

- responsibly turn prototypes into production-ready software products,
  whether traditional ML, LLMs, or agents,
- consider risks and plan for mistakes in ML components and implement
  production-quality systems that are robust to those mistakes,
- design fault-tolerant and scalable data infrastructure for learning
  models, serving models, versioning, and experimentation,
- ensure quality of the entire machine learning pipeline with test
  automation and other quality assurance techniques, including automated
  checks for data quality, data drift, feedback loops, and model
  quality,
- build models and systems that can be tested and monitored in
  production beyond just benchmark accuracy, and build robust deployment
  pipelines,
- consider system-level requirements such as safety, security, privacy,
  fairness, and usability when building complex ML-enabled products, and
- communicate effectively in interdisciplinary teams.

In addition, students will gain familiarity with production-quality
infrastructure tools, including stream processing with Apache Kafka,
test automation with GitHub actions, monitoring and experiment tracking
with Prometheus, Grafana, DVC, and Weights and Biases, and deployment
with Docker, Kubernetis and various MLOps tools.

Logistics and People

17-445/17-645/17-745/11-695, 12 Units

The course is the same under all course numbers, except for the
PhD-level 17-745 number, which replaces two homework assignments with a
mandatory research project.

Open to all undergraduate and graduate students meeting the
prerequisites. Remote sections are only available to students in the MSE
Distance Program and students at the CMU-Africa campus after discussing
parameters with the instructors.

Spring 2026

Lectures Monday/Wednesday 2:00-3:20pm, in person, Wean 7500

Labs Friday 9:30-10:50am in PH 226C (A) and Wean 5302 (B) and 11-12:20pm
in BH 225A (C) and Wean 5328 (D) and 2-3:20 in GHC 4102 (E) and Wean
5320 (F).

Instructors: Claire Le Goues and Christian Kaestner.

TAs: Abhishek Sankar, Ashritha Gonuguntla, Avya Sharma, Bhuvana
Murugadoss, Kaushik Koirala, Luis Filipe Fernandes Gomes, Nikita
Chaudhari, Hao He

Schedule

The course has recently been revised to focus more on risk managements,
AI agents, and emerging tooling.

Mon, Jan 12

Lecture Introduction and Motivation

Corresponding book chapter: 1

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Jan 14

Lecture Correctness and Risk

Corresponding book chapters: 2, 3, 15

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Jan 16

Lab Calling, securing, and creating APIs: Flask

Mon, Jan 19

Break MLK Jr day, no classes

Wed, Jan 21

Lecture Setting Goals, Gathering Requirements

Corresponding book chapters: 5, 6

Required reading: Making data science systems work

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Jan 23

Lab Stream processing: Apache Kafka

Mon, Jan 26

Due I1: ML Product

Lecture Planning for Mistakes

Corresponding book chapter: 7

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Jan 28

Lecture Model Quality

Corresponding book chapter: 15

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Jan 30

Lab Collaboration with git

Mon, Feb 2

Due I2: Requirements

Lecture Fostering Interdisciplinary (Student) Teams

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Feb 4

Lecture Behavioral Model Testing

Corresponding book chapter: 15

Required reading: Who validates the validators? Aligning LLM-assisted
evaluation of llm outputs with human preferences

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Feb 6

Lab Model testing

Mon, Feb 9

Lecture Automating and Testing ML Pipelines

Corresponding book chapters: 11, 18, 19

Required reading: The ML Test Score

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Feb 11

Lecture Deploying a Model

Corresponding book chapter: 10

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Feb 13

Lab Containers: Docker

Mon, Feb 16

Due M1: Modeling and First Deployment

Lecture Testing and Experimenting in Production

Corresponding book chapter: 19

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Feb 18

Lecture Data Quality

Corresponding book chapter: 16

Required reading: Data Cascades in High-Stakes AI

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Feb 20

Lab Continuous Integration

Mon, Feb 23

Lecture Scaling the System

Corresponding book chapter: 12

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Feb 25

Midterm Midterm

Fri, Feb 27

Break No lab (happy Spring break)

Mon, Mar 2

Break Spring break, no classes

Wed, Mar 4

Break Spring break, no classes

Fri, Mar 6

Break Spring break, no classes

Mon, Mar 9

Lecture Planning for Operations

Corresponding book chapter: 13

Required reading: How Engineers Operationalize Machine Learning

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Mar 11

Lecture ML Security

Corresponding book chapter: 28

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Mar 13

Lab Agents and MCP

Mon, Mar 16

Due M2: Infrastructure Quality

Lecture System Security

Corresponding book chapter: 28

Required reading: Supabase MCP can leak your entire SQL database

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Mar 18

Lecture Safety

Corresponding book chapter: 27

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Mar 20

Lab Monitoring: Prometheus, Grafana

Mon, Mar 23

Due I3: MCP and Security

Lecture Process & Technical Debt

Corresponding book chapters: 20, 22

Required reading: Hidden Technical Debt in Machine Learning Systems

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Mar 25

Lecture Versioning, Provenance, and Reproducibility

Corresponding book chapter: 24

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Mar 27

Lab Provenance: DVC vs Roar

Mon, Mar 30

Lecture Explainability

Corresponding book chapter: 25

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Apr 1

Lecture Transparency

Corresponding book chapter: 29

Required reading: "Hello AI": Uncovering the Onboarding Needs...

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Apr 3

Lab Model explainability tools

Mon, Apr 6

Due M3: Monitoring and CD

Lecture Accountability and Ethics

Corresponding book chapters: 23, 26

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Apr 8

Lecture Measuring Fairness

Corresponding book chapter: 26

Required reading: Human Perceptions of Fairness in Algorithmic Decision
Making

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Fri, Apr 10

Break Spring Carnival, no lab

Mon, Apr 13

Lecture Building Fairer Systems

Corresponding book chapter: 26

Required reading: Improving Fairness in Machine Learning Systems

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Apr 15

Due I4: Explainability

Break No lecture

Fri, Apr 17

Lab MiniKube

Mon, Apr 20

Lecture Explainability Discussion / Summary / Review

Ein Fehler ist aufgetreten.

JavaScript kann nicht ausgeführt werden.

Wed, Apr 22

Midterm Midterm

Fri, Apr 24

Due M4: Fairness, Security and Feedback Loops

Break No lab

Fri, May 1

Final Final project presentations in registrar-assigned final exam slot
(5:30-8:30pm in WH 7500)

(We may adjust covered content per lecture throughout the semester.)

Course Syllabus and Policies

The course uses Canvas for homework submission, grading, and
supplementary documents; slides will be posted here; Slack is used for
announcements and discussions; Github is used to coordinate group work.
All public course materials can be found in the course’s GitHub
repository.

Communication: We are happy to answer questions over Slack (preferred)
and by email, meet in person, and will jump on a quick Zoom call if you
ask us. We strongly recommend to turn on notifications for Slack at
least for direct messages and the announcements channel throughout the
semester. We also always arrive 5 to 10 min early to class and stay
longer for discussions and questions. If you have questions about
assignments and logistics, we prefer that you ask them publicly on
Slack.

Prerequisites: The course does not have formal prerequisites, but we
describe background knowledge that will help you be successful in the
course. In a nutshell, we expect basic exposure to machine learning and
basic programming skills, but do not require software engineering
experience.

Machine learning (some experience recommended): We suggest that you have
basic familiarity with the process of extracting features, building and
evaluating models, prompting LLMs, and a basic understanding of how and
when different kinds of learning techniques work. Familiarity with
Python and Jupyter notebooks is helpful. Courses such as 10-301, 10-315,
and 05-434 will prepare you well, but project experience or
self-learning from books or online courses will likely be sufficient for
our purposes. For example, if you have no prior experience, we recommend
the book Hands-On Machine Learning to get practical experience in
training and evaluating models prior to taking this course. We have set
up a prerequisite knowledge check as a Google Form, where we ask 10
questions on machine learning, which help you assess your background –
this is set up as an anonymous and ungraded quiz, where you can compare
your knowledge against what we believe is useful for you to be
successful in this course (click on “view score” after submitting your
answer). After submitting your answers, the system will give specific
pointers to readings and exercises that may help you fill gaps in
background knowledge.

Programming (basic proficiency required): The course has a substantial
programming component in all individual assignments and in the team
project, so basic programming skills will be needed. If you take the
course without programming experience or solely rely on LLMs/agents for
all your coding, you will significantly struggle and will likely cause
conflicts within the group project. We expect that you meet the
following criteria: (1) basic fluency in a programming language like
Python, (2) ability to install and learn libraries in that language, (3)
ability to ssh into a Unix machine and perform basic command line
operations, and (4) ability to install and learn new tools like Docker.
Experience with coding agents will be very useful; we will not provide
instructions in how to use them and using them without being able to
check their output will cause problems. We do not prescribe a
programming language, but almost all student teams decide to work
primarily in Python. We will provide some introductions and examples for
essential tools like Git, Docker, Grafana, and Kafka in labs, but we
expect that you will be able to pick up new tools and libraries on your
own. For example, we expect that you will be able, on your own (or with
a coding agent), to learn basic use of a library like Flask to write a
web service. Throughout the semester, expect to read lots of
documentation and tutorials to learn various libraries and tools on your
own. If you are worried whether your technical background is sufficient,
we recommend that you look at (or even try) homework I1 before the
semester.

Software engineering (no experience required): Many students will have
some software engineering experience beyond basic programming skills
from software engineering courses, from internships, or from working in
industry. This may include experience with requirements engineering,
software design/architecture, software testing, distributed systems,
continuous deployment, or managing teams. No such experience is expected
as a prerequisite; we will cover these topics in the course.

Email the instructors if you would like to further talk to us about
prerequisites.

In-person teaching and lecture recordings: The course will be taught in
person, with limited exceptions for MSE Distance students and students
at the CMU-Africa campus. We will record lectures and publicly share the
recordings. We do not provide a synchronous remote option, and we do not
record labs.

We consider in-class participation and active participation in labs an
important part of the learning experience and encourage it strongly.
However, we will give you the choice whether you want your participation
to be graded (see below).

We regularly use Slack for in-class activities. Please make sure that
you have access to Slack on a laptop, tablet, or mobile phone during
class.

If you cannot attend class due to a medical issue, family emergency,
interview, or other unforeseeable reason, please contact us about
possible accommodations. We try to be as flexible as we can, but will
handle these cases individually.

Exams: The course has two midterms and a final project presentation. The
project presentation will happen in the registrar-assigned timeslot of
the final exam (to be announced about halfway through the semester
here). The midterms are during the normal class period as per schedule.
The second midterm is not comprehensive, and only covers material after
the first midterm. Examples of past midterms can be found in the course
repository.

Grading: Evaluation will be based on the following distribution: 35%
individual assignments, 30% group project, 25% midterms and
participation (see below), 10% labs. No final exam.

We strive to provide clear specifications and clear point breakdowns for
all homework to set clear expectations and take the guessing out of
homework. We often give you choices to self-direct your learning,
deciding what to work on and how to address a problem (e.g., we never
prescribe a programming language). Clear specifications and point
breakdowns allow you to intentionally decide to skip parts of
assignments with clear upfront consequences. All parts will be graded
pass/fail for the points indicated, no partial credit. Some parts of the
grading rubric will require to verbally explain your solution to a
member of the course staff or verbally answer their questions -- usually
during any office hours within one or two weeks of submitting the
assignment. For opportunities to redo work, see resubmissions below.
Some assignments have a small amount of bonus points.

Since we give flexibility to resubmit assignments, we set grade
boundaries fairly high and we do not round grades. You can plan with the
following grade boundaries:

  Grade   Cutoff
  ------- --------
  A+      ≥99%
  A       ≥96%
  A-      ≥94%
  B+      ≥91%
  B       ≥86%
  B-      ≥82%
  C       ≥75%
  D       ≥60%

Participation: Design and engineering content strongly benefits from
active engagement with the material and discussions of judgment
decisions on specific scenarios and cases. We strongly believe in
in-class discussions and in-class exercises and want all students to
participate, e.g., answering or asking questions in class, sharing own
experiences, presenting results, or participating in in-class votes and
surveys. We will give many opportunities for participation in every
lecture and lab, including at least one breakout session in very single
lecture.

Students in the class can opt in to having their participation reflected
in the grade. If they do, the midterms counts for 15% and participation
for 10%. If they do not, midterms count for 25% and participation is not
graded.

For participation grading, we note student engagement with in-class
activities to include as a component in grading. We also consider
inauthentic participation in in-class activities (e.g., asking others to
cover for you and pretend you participated) as an academic integrity
violation (see below). Please talk to us if you need accommodations.

For students opting into in-class participation, we assign participation
grades as follows:

- 100%: Participates actively at least once in most lectures (4 lectures
  waived, no questions asked)
- 80%: Participates actively at least once in two thirds of the lectures
- 60%: Participates actively at least once in over half of the lectures
- 30%: Participates actively at least once in one quarter of the
  lectures
- 0%: Participation in less than one quarter of the lectures.

Labs: Labs typically introduce tools and have a task with multiple clear
deliverables. Each deliverable is graded pass/fail. You receive a grade
by showing your work to the TA during that week's lab session (your own
section). Typically showing your work involves showing source code,
demoing executions, and verbally answering a few questions to
demonstrate your understanding. The TA may ask a few questions to probe
your understanding. While labs are generally in person, we may offer
additional opportunities to show your work to a TA online the evening
before the lab sessions.

Lab assignments are designed to take about 1 to 2 hours of work. We
encourage you to start the lab before the lab session, but you can
continue to work on it during the lab session. We encourage
collaboration on labs: You can work together with other students both
before the lab session and during the lab session. While we do not
recommend it, you may look at and even copy other solutions. However,
you will have to present and explain your solution to the TA on your
own.

We intend labs to be low stakes – this is your first practical
engagement with the material and mistakes are a normal part of the
learning process. Deliverables are graded pass/fail on whether they meet
the stated expectations for the deliverables. If your solution does not
meet the expectations you can continue working on it during the lab
session until it does. For example, the TA may ask you to revisit your
solution or look up documentation if not satisfied with your
explanation. Outside of explicit accommodations (e.g., medical issues)
or using tokens (see below), we do not accept lab solutions after the
end of your lab session.

Textbook, reading assignments, and reading quizzes: The book "Machine
Learning in Production" aligns closely with the lecture content --
available for free online and in print through MIT Press or anywhere
where books are sold. We will not assign chapters from our own textbook,
but we always point to the corresponding chapter for each lecture. You
might find these useful to review concepts from the lectures.

We will assign various additional readings, including blog posts and
academic papers, throughout the semester, typically one per week. We
expect that you read the assigned readings before that lecture and that
you will be able to discuss them during the lecture/in-class activities.

Teamwork: Teamwork is an essential part of this course. The course
contains a multi-milestone group project to be done in teams of 3-6
students. Teams will be assigned by the instructor. A TA will serve as a
mentor for each team. We will help teams throughout the semester and
cover some specific content on teamwork as part of the course. Peer
rating will be performed for team assignments with regard to team
citizenship (i.e., being active and cooperative members), following a
procedure adapted from this article, which we will further explain in an
early lecture. Use this form to preview the expected grade adjustments
for peer ratings. Each team must schedule a 30 minute meeting with their
team mentor in the week after every milestone to discuss their solution,
debrief on teamwork, and explore possible strategies to improve
teamwork.

Late work policy and resubmissions: We understand that students will
always have competing deadlines, unusual events, interviews for job
searches, and other activities that compete with coursework. We
therefore build flexibility and a safety net directly into the rubric.
If you need additional accommodations for exceptional circumstances,
please contact us.

In addition, we expect that the past/fail grading scheme without partial
credit, may lead to harsh point deductions for missing small parts of
the requirements, so we provide a mechanism to resubmit work to regain
most lost points.

Every student receives 8 individual tokens that they can spend
throughout the semester in the following ways:

- For each token, a student can submit a homework assignment 1 day late
  without any grading penalty (with 2 tokens a student can submit two
  homeworks one day late each or a single homework up to two days late).
  If a student runs out of tokens, late individual assignments receive a
  penalty of 15% per started day.
- For three tokens, a student can resubmit (i.e., improve or redo) an
  individual homework assignment. If the grade for the resubmitted
  assignment is higher than the original grade, 90% of the difference is
  added to the original grade. For example, if the original assignment
  was 80 points and the resubmitted one was 100 points, the resulting
  grade is 80+(100-80)*.9 = 98 points. Resubmissions can be made at any
  time in the semester up to the final project presentation (see
  schedule). – Note that this technically allows a student to blow the
  original deadline (no submission necessary, receiving 0 points
  initially) and then resubmit the homework arbitrarily late for three
  tokens and a 10% penalty.
- For one token, a student can complete a lab late or redo a lab (any
  time before the final presentation) by showing the work to a TA during
  office hours.
- Penalties for late/missing team formation survey and late/missing
  teamwork peer assessment surveys can be waived for one token each.
- Remaining individual tokens at the end of the semester are counted as
  one participation day each.

Every team independently receives 8 team tokens that they can spend for
extensions of any milestone deadline (1 token per day per milestone,
except final presentation deadline) or to resubmit any milestone (3
tokens each, resubmitted any time before the final presentation; same
10% tax on regained points as for individual assignments). If a team
runs out of tokens, late submissions in group assignments receive a
penalty of 15% per started day.

Individual tokens and team tokens are entirely separate; it is not
possible to use individual tokens for teamwork or vice versa. The team
should make collective decisions about how to use team tokens.

In general, late submissions and resubmissions can be done at any point
in the semester before the final presentations. Submit them in Canvas as
a "new attempt".

Exceptions to this policy will be made at the discretion of the
instructor in important circumstances, almost always involving a family
or medical emergency and an email from your advisor — you can ask your
academic advisor or the Dean of Student Affairs requesting the exception
on your behalf. Where issues affect teamwork, please communicate
proactively with your team.

Auditing: Due to the high demand for this course, we do not allow
official forms of auditing. If you like to self-study, all course
materials are online. We welcome interested students and visitors to sit
in for lectures as long as the room capacity allows it.

Time management: This is a 12-unit course, and it is our intention to
manage it so that you spend close to 12 hours a week on the course, on
average. In general, 3 hours/week will be spent in class, about 1-2 hour
for the labs, and 7 hours on assignments. Notice that much homework is
done in groups, so please account for the overhead and decreased time
flexibility that comes with groupwork. Please give the course staff
feedback if the time the course is taking for you differs significantly
from our intention.

Writing: Describing tradeoffs among decisions and communication with
stakeholders from other backgrounds are key aspects of this class. Many
homework assignments have a component that requires discussing issues in
written form or reflecting about experiences. To practice writing
skills, the Global Communications Center (GCC) offers one-on-one help
for students, along with workshops. The instructors are also happy to
provide additional guidance if requested.

Use of content generation AI tools and external sources: Given the
nature of this course, we are open to using AI tools for completing
work. We place no restrictions on the use of content generation tools,
such as ChatGPT, Claude, Claude Code, Co-Pilot, or Cursor. You may also
reuse code from external sources, such as StackOverflow or tutorials,
without acknowledgment. In any case, you will be solely responsible for
the correctness of the solution. Note that content generation tools
often create plausible-looking but incorrect answers, which will not
receive credit. Using code generation tools without understanding the
generated code will likely create challenges when answering TA questions
for labs or assignments and will likely create teamwork problems. You
are also responsible for complying with any applicable licenses.

Academic honesty and collaboration: The usual policies apply, especially
the University Policy on Academic Integrity. Many parts of the work will
be done in groups. We expect that group members collaborate with one
another, but that groups work independently from other groups, not
exchanging results with other groups. Within groups, we expect that you
are honest about your contribution to the group's work. This implies not
taking credit for others' work and not covering for team members that
have not contributed to the team. This also applies to in-class
discussions, where indicating working with others who did not
participate in the discussion is considered an academic honesty
violation. Otherwise, our expectations regarding academic honestly and
collaboration for group and pair work are the same as for individual
work, substituting elevated to the level of "group."

Beyond that, the key guiding principle of academic honesty in this
course is: "You may not copy any part of a solution to a problem that
was written by another student (in this or prior iterations of the
class), or was developed together with another student, or was delegated
to another person. You may not look at another student's solution, even
if you have completed your own, nor may you knowingly give your solution
to another student or leave your solution where another student can see
it." Note that this implies that you cannot publicly post your solutions
on GitHub (e.g., as part of a portfolio during job applications). While
the use of AI content generation tools is okay (see above) using the
work from other students is not. Discussing challenges and solution
strategies with others at a high level is okay, sharing code or text is
not.

You may collaborate with other students on labs, but not on homeworks
and exams.

We also expect and respect honesty when communicating with the course
staff.

Any violation of this policy is cheating. The minimum penalty for
cheating will be a zero grade for the whole assignment. For cheating on
participation, the minimum penalty is -100% on the participation grade.
Cheating incidents will also be reported through University channels,
with possible additional disciplinary action (see the University Policy
on Academic Integrity). There is no statute of limitations for
violations of the collaboration policy; penalties may be assessed (and
referred to the university disciplinary board) after you have completed
the course, and some requirements of the collaboration policy (such as
restrictions on you posting your solutions) extend beyond your
completion of the course.

If you have any question about how this policy applies in a particular
situation, ask the instructors for clarification.

Research in this Course: We are conducting academic research in this
course. This research will involve analyzing student work of assignment.
You will not be asked to do anything above and beyond the normal
learning activities and assignments that are part of this course. You
are free not to participate in this research, and your participation
will have no influence on your grade for this course or your academic
career at CMU. If you do not wish to participate, please send an email
to Nadia Nahar (nadian@andrew.cmu.edu). Participants will not receive
any compensation or extra credit. The data collected as part of this
research will not include student grades. All analyses of data from
participants’ coursework will be conducted after the course is over and
final grades are submitted -- instructors will not know who chooses not
to participate before final grades are submitted. All data will be
analyzed in de-identified form and presented in the aggregate, without
any personal identifiers. If you have questions pertaining to your
rights as a research participant, or to report concerns to this study,
please contact Nadia Nahar (nadian@andrew.cmu.edu) or the Office of
Research Integrity and Compliance at Carnegie Mellon University
(irb-review@andrew.cmu.edu; phone: 412-268-4721).

Accommodations for students with disabilities: If you have a disability
with an accommodations letter from the Disability Resources office, we
encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs with us as early
in the semester as possible. Please come and talk to us and do not rely
on automated emails from the Disability Resources office. We will work
with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate. If
you suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from
accommodations but are not yet registered with the Office of Disability
Resources, we encourage you to contact them at access@andrew.cmu.edu.

A note on self care. Please take care of yourself. Do your best to
maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising,
avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to
relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. All
of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone.
There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important
part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking
for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone
you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or
feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek
support. Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS) is here to help:
call 412-268-2922 and visit their website at
http://www.cmu.edu/counseling/. Consider reaching out to a friend,
faculty or family member you trust for help getting connected to the
support that can help. If you are worried about affording food or
feeling insecure about food, there are resources on campus that can
help, such as the CMU Pantry.
