Lab 1: Calling, Building, and Securing APIs

In homework I1 you will use third-party LLM APIs, and in the group
project you will develop your own APIs. In this lab you will experiment
with both: connecting to an LLM of your choice, and providing your own
API endpoint.

To receive credit for this lab, show your work to the TA during
recitation.

Deliverables

- ☐ Use an API key to invoke an LLM API and generate a schema-enforced
  JSON travel itinerary.
- ☐ Run the API endpoint with the LLM call implemented and demonstrate
  that it works using an example invocation.
- ☐ Commit your code without committing your credentials. Explain to the
  TA why hard-coding credentials is a bad idea, and explain any remedial
  steps you might take should credentials accidentally be leaked.

Getting started

Clone the starter code from this Git repository.

The code implements a Flask web application that exposes an API endpoint
for generating a structured travel itinerary for a given destination.
The API accepts a destination string and returns a JSON response
containing high-level travel information.

To generate this response, you will need to call an LLM. We suggest
using Meta’s Llama, hosted by Groq, using LiteLLM to abstract
client-specific details.

Install the dependencies listed in requirements.txt using pip or a
similar tool. The Flask server can be started with:

    python3 app.py

Once running, the API will be available at:

    http://localhost:8000/api/v1/itinerary

Generate an LLM API Key

For this we suggest using an API key from Groq but you are certainly
free to use other API keys, such as those from OpenAI, Anthropic, etc.,
Instructions for using those keys can be found here. The instructions
below are shown for getting an API key from Groq. 1. Sign into your Groq
account and navigate to the API keys console 2. Generate a new API key
3. Update the code in analyze.py with the API key retrieved from Groq
and test it.

Secure your Credentials

The starter code hardcodes credentials in the code. This is a bad
practice.

Research and discuss best practices, such as never hard-code
credentials, never commit credentials to Git, rotate secrets regularly,
encrypt your secrets at rest/in-transit if possible, practice
least-access privilege on machines where your credentials are stored as
environment variables or within local files.

Rewrite the code to load credentials from a file or an environment
variable and commit the code without the credentials.

Implement the call to the LLM

Using LiteLLM, implement the logic in analyze.py to call a an LLM. We
suggest groq/llama-3.3-70b-versatile but you are free to use others.

Your implementation should - Make at least one LLM call using LiteLLM -
Request a structured JSON response - Enforce (or validate) the structure
of the response against a predefined schema. The schema should include
the following fields: - destination - price_range - ideal_visit_times -
top_attractions

The response from your implemented API call should look something like
what is shown below:

    {
        "destination": "...",
        "ideal_visit_times": [
            ...
        ],
        "price_range": ...,
        "top_attractions": [
           ...
        ]
    }

Calling your own API

The Flask server serves a simple documentation page at:

    http://localhost:8000/

It also exposes the API endpoint:

    GET http://localhost:8000/api/v1/itinerary

The endpoint expects a required query parameter: - destination: the
destination to generate an itinerary for

You can use tools like curl or Postman to ensure your API endpoint is
functioning appropriately.

The file mlip-api-lab-collection.json has a sample request to test calls
to your API with Postman. Consider using Postman test scripts to test
the response of your API endpoints (status codes, response structure,
etc.,).

Additional resources

- Redhat article on API
- API Design Best Practices
- API Endpoint Best Practices
- LiteLLM documentation
